
Geo I 
Humanity and the Earth: An Overview of Everything
What is Geology?
Originally (14th Century):
"Non-astrological Law"
Commonly:
"Study of the Earth"
Practically:
"Study of Natural Phenomena Related to the Earth and Other Planets"
(beyond Earth and Rocks: Planets, magnetic and electric fields).
For purposes of conveying Geology to newcomers, we often make a distinction
between
Processes at the Earth's Surface (GeoII)
Processes within the Earth's Interior (GeoI)
But of course these are related - the division is only for convenience.

Geo I 
Why study Geology?
Big reason #1:
Stewardship of the Planet and Responsible Management of Natural Resources:
Growing population on a finite planet. How do we
get "stuff" and how to we go about it in a sustainable way? How do we live on the
Earth and keep it habitable?
Big reason #2:
Understanding the causes and effects of Natural Hazards
Earthquakes, Volcanoes, Floods, Tornados, Tsunamis, etc.
Big reason #3:
Understanding how the Earth "works".
How did things get to be the way they are?
Can we understand this complex system by viewing it over a long 
time?
Big reason #4:
It's always challenging, and not only intellectually.
Multidisciplinary:  Physics, Chemistry, Biology, Math, Computer Science, 
English
Venues ranging from an office cubicle to the wilds of Central Asia.
Geology is a very young science.  Most of what we understand was
learned within the last 30 years.

Geo I 
Let's back up a bit and have a look at a general philosophical question:
How do we "know" or "understand" things? And what exactly does that mean, 
anyway?
This is a question that has plagued a number of philosophical types for many 
years.  I suggest to you that everything you need to know is based on a simple 
concept called 
The Scientific Method
Despite its importance and simplicity, the scientific method is not 
understood by a lot of people, even some who claim to be scientists.
Here are the steps in the scientific method as it is commonly described:
Observe some phenomenon. 
Invent a tentative description of cause and effect, 
called a hypothesis, that is consistent with what you have 
observed (i.e., the cause you propose is likely to have some connection to the effect you observed). 
Use the hypothesis to make predictions.   
Test those predictions by experiments or further observations and modify the hypothesis in 
light of your results.  
Repeat steps 3 and 4 until there are no significant discrepancies between theory and 
experiment and/or observation.

Geo I 
Why does this work so well in practice?  Because hidden in here (in step #3 - using the hypothesis
to make predictions - in 
particular) is an answer
to the question of what reality is:  Reality is what happens next.
Why is that?  Because we live in an infinitesimally short moment of time we call 
the present, and the present is continously becoming the past.  We cannot stop 
this from happening, we cannot slow it down, and we cannot reverse the process.
Neither do we have any ability to see with absolute certainty what will happen 
in the future, even in the most immediate future.  All we can do is extrapolate 
from the past.   Because the future is always arriving, it is a great advantage 
to be able to predict what will happen next. Trying to predict what will happen 
next is arguably the most important thing we do, and is the basis for most of 
science, philosophy, religion and virtually every arena of human thought.
So, science is about figureing out what happens next.
We "know" or "understand" something to the extent that we can make
successful predictions about it.  Explanations about anything that have
no predictive qualities are useless in this regard because it is
possible to fabricate multiple explanations for past events.   It is
only when we successfully test our explanations against the passage of 
time that we can say that we understand something.

Geo I 
Note also that it isn't useful to make predictions that would be true even if the
hypothesis was false.  A valid test of a hypothesis must include conditions
under which it will fail.
Examples of practically useless hypotheses and predictions:  
If there is snow in November, there will be Christmas in December.
There once were people who lived on Neptune centuries ago, but they
disappeared without a trace.  This hypothesis predicts that I should see no trace of civilization on Neptune.
If I wear this medallion, no elephants will appear in my office.
If a woman can drown, she is not a witch. (Not a clever test for witches for obvious reasons, but also
note that in order for this to be useful, one would have to
have to observe a correlation between women who can not drown and women who are witches.)
The best hypotheses make predictions about phenomena that have not yet been observed.
Examples:  
Relativity and the dependence of time on gravitational acceleration.
Newton's law of gravity and the existence of planets not yet observed predicted by orbital perturbations to
other planets.
Rates of plate motion deduced from magnetic stripes in the ocean floor.

Geo I 
It is the goal of science to look for the "rules" we can use to make 
predictions.  To the extent that they work, they become our best guess at what 
reality is.  
Of course, we apply these same rules ourselves in many "common sense"
applications.  We often take a general rule as "truth", and use it as
long as it makes successful predictions.
Finally, note that just because something worked today doesn't mean it's
going to work tomorrow.  There is no guarantee.  But putting your faith in 
experiential rules is arguably the best you can do.

Geo I
An important concept:
"A finite amount of observations can be explained in an infinite
number of ways"
We always have "A finite amount of observations".
With the exception of tautologies (truisms), all knowledge is probabilistic.
In other words, we can't know anything exactly, we can only estimate how
probable something is. The more observations we explain with a theory, the
more probable it is.
HOWEVER, note that the probability is never 1, which means there is
always some chance that the model, no matter how used to it we are, could
be wrong.
Thus, in a sense, "scientific fact" is an oxymoron.
 This is one example of how imprecise use of words can get us into big trouble.

Geo I
So given an infinite number of explanations, what can you do? 
Because there are an infinite number of probable explanations for an
observation, we generally follow the rule that "the simplest explanation
is the most probable" where "simplest" typically means "the explanation
that is the closest to what we already think we know". 
A technical term
for this process is known as Occam's razor.
Thus, we typically are conservative and stick to a model until reliable
observations force us to do otherwise. 
This philosophy prevents improbable
models from gaining a foothold. Of course, we are glad to jettison old
models if they are no longer feasible, and welcome those that are.
The following terms apply to models with decreasing probability:
Fact (Observation)
Law
Theory
Hypothesis
Belief (hypothesis tested only by intuition)
Guess (untested hypothesis)
People who are not familiar with these ideas create the image of "scientific
mavericks" who are squelched by the "establishment" and look for conspiracies
in the retention of older models.

Geo I
Ok, let's go back over the BIG REASONS again:
Big Reason #1:
Responsible Management of Natural Resources
Society has always been very strongly effected by the availability of natural
resources. When populations were low, the biggest question was how to increase
supply. We became good at this, and populations grew. Now the big question
is how to sustain our use of these resources.
On the supply side:
Locating and exploiting new sources of energy, building materials, agricultural
materials (soil and fertilizer), and fresh water.
Figuring out what to do with waste.
On the demand side:
Growing demand from developing societies;  Growing populations.
We'll discuss the "supply side" of this equation at some length later
in this course (and in greater depth in GeoII). Let's review some ideas
about the "demand" side.

Geo I
Population: The Demand Side of the Equation
How fast does population grow, what controls it, and what
are the effects?
NB: For the moment we will presume that everyone has the same requirements for
resources, which is typically governed by the "standard of living".
Natural populations tend to grow exponentially (the rate of change is
proportional to the number of individuals, or, the more people there are,
the faster the population grows).
There are a number of ways one could think about to characterize an
exponential rate. Let's discuss some of the more useful ways:
Generally, the rate of population growth is the difference between the
birth rate (BR = number of births per year) and the death rate (DR = number
of deaths per year).
GR = BR - DR
Because the number of births and deaths in a population can be expected
to be proportional to the number of people in the population, the growth
rate is proportional to that number as well, and thus we can talk about
GR as a percentage (%/yr) or a fractional percentage (just %/100).

Geo I
Calculating Population Growth
Calculating the population over a number of years is then exactly like
calculating compound interest. For example:
Say the initial population is P0, and the population in 1
year is P1 , and so on, then if we consider GR to be a fractional
increase, we have:
P1 = P0(1 + GR)
P2 = P1(1 + GR) = P0(1 +
GR)2
. . .
Pn = P0(1 + GR)n

For example, say the percentage growth rate is 2%, then the fractional
growth rate (GR) is 0.02, and
Pn = P0(1.02)n
Thus, at this rate, in 5 years time:
P5 /P0 = (1.02)5 = 1.10
and in 50 years time:
P50 /P0 = (1.02)50 = 2.69

Geo I/
We often use as a benchmark the number of years it takes for a population
to double (the Doubling Time)
Pn/P0 = 2 = (1 + GR)n
Solving for n:

ln(2) = (n)*ln(1 + GR)
n = ln(2) / ln(1 + GR)
If GR << 1 then ln(1 + GR) ~ GR
n ~ ln(2)/GR = 0.6931/GR (*100/100) ~ 70/(GR%).
This is the so-called "rule of 70".
Thus, if
GR = 1%, n ~ 70 years
GR = 2%, n ~ 35 years
Population growth at a given rate thus follows what is called a "J" curve.

Geo I
A Short History of Human Population Growth

In the Beginning
People have been around for about 106 years, living originally
in hunter/gatherer types of communities until about 8000 BC. 
The population
at that time is estimated to be about 8,000,000.
To go from 2 to 8,000,000 requires about 23 doublings ( = ln(8x106)/ln(2)),
so on average the population doubled about once every 43000 years. 
The
average growth rate over this time period would be
70/43000 = 0.0016% per year
which is pretty meager.

Geo I/
The Agricultural Revolution
With the introduction of agriculture at about 8000 BC, food supplies
stabilized and the death rate went down significantly. 
From 8000 BC to
about 1750, the population grew to about 600 million, or another 6 doublings.
The average doubling time would be about 1600 years, and the growth rate
would be
70/1600 = 0.044%
a rate increase of about 20 times.

Geo I
The Industrial Revolution:
The period since the Industrial Revolution has witnessed dramatic changes
in health care and food production, further reducing the death rate. 
Since
about 1750, the population has grown to about 6 billion, or about 3 doublings
in 250 years. 
The average doubling time is 80 years, and the growth rate
is
70/80 = 0.875%
or nearly 1% a year!

Geo I/Planet Earth I
Recent Past
World population growth rates peaked in the 1960's at about 2%, and
have since dropped to about 1.7%. 
The current doubling time is thus 70/1.7
= 41 years.

Important point: Most of our population growth has taken place
in the last century or so, and a great part of it just within the past
2-3 decades. 
This creates a far greater demand on Earth resources than
has ever before existed.

Geo I
A few more details about why and how the population has exploded
in the last 100 years.

A useful demographic model to describe population dynamics goes in "stages"
as follows:

Stage 1. (Pre-Industrial)
Birth rate is high, but so is the death rate, so the net growth rate remains
small.

Geo I
Stage 2. (Transitional)
Birth rate remains high, but death rate drops, so growth rate increases
dramatically. Reasons for the death rate to fall:

1. Increased food availability
Improved agriculture

Better distribution of food

Better nutrition

2. Reduced incidence of disease

Better sanitation; clean water and better waste management so diseases
like typhus, diphtheria, cholera, dysentery are no longer a big problem.

Better personal hygiene

Better medical technology (immunizations, other health care)


Geo I
Stage 3. (Industrial)
Birth Rate begins to drop, causing a declining GR. Reasons:

Economic motivation - with urbanization children are no longer needed
for farm labor. Large families can cause an economic hardship instead of
a source of cheap labor.
Medical - birth control/contraception
Social - general acceptance of childless couples; women put off having
children until they are late into child bearing years.

Geo I
Stage 4. (Post Industrial)
Low birth and death rates (both < 2%) so that GR continues to decrease.
Continued lowering of birth rate make GR <= 0.

Geo I
In terms of where they fit into this model, the world today can be divided
into two general groups:

More Developed Countries (MDC): those in stage 3 or 4

Examples: US, Japan, and France are in stage 3 with < 1% GR

Sweden, Denmark, and Germany are in stage 4 with 0 or negative GR.

Less Developed Countries (LDC): those in stage 2: DR has dropped
but BR remains high.
AN IMPORTANT CONSEQUENCE: 90% of the future world population growth will
be in LDC.

Geo I
POPULATION PROJECTIONS

Based on achieving a TFR (Total Fertility Rate) of 2.5 for the world (i.e. the rate required for a stable 
population), here are some
projections on when total world population would become stable:

Year that TFR of 2.5 is reached
Year a stable population is reached
Total pop
2005
2040
8 billion
2025
2110
10.5 billion
2045
2130
14.2 billion
The population today is about 7 billion.  The World's population presently increases
at a rate of about 6 million persons per month.
Under the middle scenario, (TFR of 2.5 in 2025), MDC would stabilize
in 2080 with a total population of 1.4 billion, and LDC would stabilize
in 2110 with a total population of 9.2 billion.
Best current guess: the world population will continue to increase
until about 2100 when a stable population 2-3x larger than today's will
be achieved.
Here are a few graphs summarizing the best estimates of the US Census Bureau:
Note: the dip in the growth rate from 1959-1960 was due to the "Great Leap Forward" in China. 
During that time, both natural disasters and decreased agricultural output in the wake of 
massive social reorganization caused China's death rate to rise sharply and its fertility rate to fall by almost half.
Estimates of the total number of deaths in China during this period are as high as 45 million. For comparison,
about 50 million people died worldwide as a result of WWII.
The entire human population accounts for roughly 340 billion kilograms. That, according to 
Harvard biologist E.O. Wilson, 
is more than 100 times the biomass of any large animal that has ever walked the Earth.  We have been extraordinarily
successful as a species.

Geo I
Big reason #2.
Understanding the causes and effects of Natural Hazards
As forces in the universe go, humans, and many of their artifices, are
pretty puny.
Moreover, we are recent additions to the universe, so in a way we haven't
really stood the test of time.
Our activities and our shear numbers perturb a complex system about
which we have only rudimentary understanding. So far, our approach has,
for the most part, been to ignore the consequences. We often appeal to
the "good old days", but in fact we are so recent there are not really
any comparable times in human history.
Geologic hazards:
Floods
Landslides
Earthquakes
Storms (tornados, hurricanes, typhoons)
Volcanic eruptions
Tsunamis (tidal waves)

Geo I/Planet Earth I
By understanding Geology, we hope to determine
Where events can or will occur
How often
How to provide an early warning
Prevention or mitigation procedures
Problems that evolve when people don't bother learning how the earth works:
Over control of rivers
Irrigation that depletes ground water
Beach and harbor control projects.
And those are the relatively minor ones.   Don't get me started on climate change.
Note that basically these problems arize because of our unwillingness to
accept the dynamism of natural phenomena. We can put nature in a box for
only a short amount of time, but inevitably there is a price to pay.
By understanding geologic processes, we have a much better idea of the
cost/benefit ratio. These lead to informed decisions that avoid long term
costs for short term benefits.
Are there times when it is better not to exploit a natural resourse?  
Only relatively recently did we begin to understand that sometimes the answer is "YES", the costs
may far outweigh the benefits.

Geo I
Big reason #3:
Understanding How the Earth "Works"
Things to understand:
How do landscapes evolve? What causes a valley to be a certain shape?
Why are there mountains or volcanoes in some areas and not others? What
causes those weird landforms in the western US?
What is the history of the Earth? How did we get where we are now?
Can we learn lessons from our planet's long past?
What does the interior of the Earth look like? What's under the surface?
The questions have a lot of implications beyond the academic realm.  We have occupied the
Earth for only a very brief time and we have yet to understand what Nature is capable of doing
on our planet.

Geo I
A note on JARGON
We begin to understand things by naming them.  Examples:  Garden of Eden, Linneaus.
However, occasionally this gets out of hand.
JARGON, n.,
Incoherent speech, gibberish
the specialized vocabulary and idioms of those in the same work or way
of life; a somewhat derogatory term implying unintelligibility (slang).
a colorless or smoky variety of zircon.
When is Jargon ok?
Historical reasons; usage is already well established, even if it tends
to obfuscate.
It leads to a clearer understanding of a subject than does "normal" or
"established" language.
When is Jargon just pain in the butt?
When it is used for purposes of exclusivity (like a password).
Geology probably has more JARGON than any other academic field (even the
word jargon has a special geological meaning). Geologic dictionaries are
easily as thick as those of formal languages. At times, this can be aggravating.
The principal reason for this is that people have used the materials that Geology 
investigates for as long as there have been people; many observations
entered the vernacular before the underlying principals and connectivity
were revealed. Something like having separate names for the different sides
of a mountain.
