===== metrx_01a.html =====


GeoI Metamorphic Rocks
Geology I
Metamorphism and Metamorphic Rocks:
Gneiss Cooking!
Metamorphic rocks (meta = change; morph = form) are those
in which the constituent minerals have changed from a previous state while
they are still in a coherent solid state.  This differs from Igneous rocks, which
solidify from a melt, and sedimentary rocks, which forms from lithified
sediment (weathered bits that stick themselves back together).
To understand metamorphic rocks, we discuss the following:
What are the processes by which minerals change in the solid state?
What are the important kinds of metamophic rock and how do we classify them
in a useful way?
What are the environments in which metamorphic rock evolve?


===== metrx_01b.html =====


GeoI Metamorphic Rocks
Let's begin with the processes by which these changes occur, which come under the
rubric of
Metamorphism
Metamorphism is the process by which the mineralogy and
arrangement of rocks (textures) are modified at depth in the Earth in
response mainly to changes in temperature and pressure. The key idea
in metamorphism is change in the solid state. Metamorphism occurs
well below the Earth's surface and by definition is not a weathering
or sedimentary type of change. Nor is it an igneous process because
the rock undergoing metamorphism does not melt; it remains solid
throughout its metamorphic history.
Just as weathering results in the development of minerals that are
more stable at the earth's surface, metamorphism produces new
minerals that are stable under the conditions operating within the
earth's crust. Which minerals develop depends upon what those
conditions are and what type of rock it starts off as (called the
protolith). It is not
possible to produce sodic minerals, for example, from a rock that is
deficient in Na.
A metamorphic rock is a rock that has changed its form.
That is, its mineralogy and texture has changed in response to
changes in temperature and pressure in the earth's crust to which it
has been subjected.
The Limits of Metamorphism
Metamorphism occurs at temperatures and pressures between those at
which sedimentary rocks form and those at which rocks begin to melt. 
 Temperature and pressure relationships of various
   processes operating in the Earth's crust 
The lower limit of metamorphism is at temperatures of
around 200C and pressures of 2 to 3 Kb. At pressure-temperature
conditions lower than this, changes to rocks occur through weathering
(at the surface) or diagenesis (during burial). Diagenesis is
gradational to metamorphism.
The upper limit of metamorphism is at temperatures of around 700
to 900C and at pressures around 12 Kb. This upper limit is
determined by the onset of partial melting of crustal rocks, and
varies with the amount of water present. Minerals with low-melting
points such quartz and alkali feldspar will melt first. Layers of
rock that are water-rich will also melt before layers that are
water-poor. Rocks that show the onset of partial melting, that is,
they have a mixture of igneous and metamorphic textures, are known as
migmatites.
The term "grade" of metamorphism refers to the approximate
temperature of metamorphism. Low-grade metamorphism refers to
processes that occur at temperatures below 200 - 320C and at
relatively low pressures. High-grade metamorphism refers to
metamorphic processes at high temperature greater than 550C and
high pressure.
Metamorphic Grades
Factors Controlling Metamorphism
The nature of a metamorphic rock will depend on
the original composition of the rock,
the P-T conditions that the rock has been subjected to,
the amount and composition of fluids in pore spaces, and
the amount of time required for reactions to take place
The most important agents, or causes of metamorphism are heat, pressure and
fluids.
Heat
As we know, when we heat up a material we increase the level of vibration at
the molecular level, which weakens the bonds that hold minerals together.  This
can allow individual atoms to migrate, resulting in a macroscopic layering of 
different mineral types.  This phenomenon is called compositional banding.
An increase in temperature also leads to the loss of water or carbon
dioxide, forming one or more new minerals in the process. Such
reactions are named devolatilisation reactions. A metamorphic
reaction giving off water is called a dehydration reaction, whereas a
metamorphic reaction giving off carbon dioxide is termed a
decarbonation reaction.
A good example for a decarbonation reaction is the metamorphism of
a quartz-bearing limestone. If heated sufficiently, quartz and
calcite react to form wollastonite and carbon dioxide.
CaCO3 + SiO2 =>
   CaSiO3 + CO2
calcite + quartz => wollastonite + carbon dioxide
A good example for a dehydration reaction is the metamorphism of
kaolinite. If heated sufficiently, kaolinite reacts to andalusite,
quartz and water.
Al2Si2O5(OH)
   4 => Al2SiO5 + SiO2 +
   H2O
   
   kaolinite => andalusite + quartz + water
Pressure
Bond breaking
Generally an increase in pressure leads to a reduction in volume,
and a consequent increase in density. Pressure at the contact points
between grains in a sedimentary rock may break the bonding of ions.
These ions migrate to regions of lower pressure in the pore spaces
where they rebond with the minerals. This dissolution and
reprecipitation form triple junctions between grains. 
Denser polymorphs
The growth of new minerals may also form that have a denser
structure. For the aluminosilicates, for example, kyanite
(Al2SiO5) is the high temperature
polymorph of andalusite (Al2SiO5). The two
minerals have the same chemical composition, but they have a
different arrangement of atoms giving rise to different
crystallographic structures and thus different minerals. Kyanite has
a specific gravity of 3.6 compared to 3.2 for andalusite. Kyanite has
a bladed habit, whereas andalusite typically occurs as square
prismatic crystals.
Pressure vs. Stress and the creation of Foliation
Stress is defined as a force per unit area.  Pressure is usually defined
as uniform (directionless) stress (i.e., the same force per unit area in all
directions).  That's pretty simple, but different texts use different terminology; 
here's a summary
of some of the lexicon you might encounter.
Stess is a generally more useful term in Geology because the force per unit
area often is a function of direction. There are two types of pressure or stress
often defined as important metamorphic agents: Load pressure (confining
pressure) or uniform stress and directed pressure or differential
stress.
Load pressure (or uniform stress or confining
pressure or lithostatic pressure) is uniform, i.e. acting
equally in all directions.  In the Earth it is caused by the weight of the overlying
rocks and therefore increases with depth. The important relation to remember
is:
pressure = density x gravitational acceleration (g) x height
The pressure gradient is 
250 to 300 bars per kilometer depending on the density of the rocks.
A typical load pressure at 35 kilometres depth is 10 Kbars.
Directed pressure (or differential stress) is non-uniform, i.e. it is not
equal in all directions.  It is caused by tectonic forces. Such forces cause the
development of major structures such as folds and faults, as well as acting as
metamorphic agent. The amount of directed pressure is unrelated to depth of burial.
Directed pressure generally causes flattening of mineral grains and the development
of platy minerals (especially micas) growing parallel to the direction of least
stress. The alignment of numerous micas will produce a foliation.
Elongated Conglomerate Grains
Units of pressure
A bar is a measure of the pressure of the atmosphere on the
earth's surface. It is equal to 1.02 dyne / cm2. Weather
maps indicate pressure in millibars. Pressure in the earth's crust is
either measured in kilobars (Kb) or megapascals (MPa). 1 Kb = 100 MPa (1
Pa is 1 Newton per square meter). This is about the pressure exerted 3
km below the surface.
Metamorphism requires pressures greater than 1 Kb, but as the
temperatures required for metamorphism do not normally occur until
above 10 km (at a pressure of around 3Kb), metamorphism does not
usually take place at these low pressures unless a heat source has
been introduced.
Fluids
The spaces between minerals are known as the pore spaces. This
pore space is filled with watery fluids, known as intergranular
fluid. The fluid may be a liquid, or, at high temperatures, a
vapour. The fluid is largely water, but also contains salts and
volatiles and other elements. Intergranular fluids are normally
water-rich, though carbon dioxide may be a significant component,
especially in rocks containing carbonate (e.g. limestones). As P-T
conditions alter mineral assemblages, so, too, does the composition
of the intergranular fluid change, with some elements moving into the
fluid, and some moving from the fluid to the new minerals.
Intergranular fluids play an important role during
metamorphism:
Reactions in dry rocks are very sluggish and few changes take
   place. Fluids act as catalysts, i.e. they accelerate otherwise
   slow mineralogical reactions.
Dry rocks are poor heat conductors. Fluids transfer heat from
   heat sources such as cooling plutons into cooler country rocks
   which promotes the growth of new minerals.
Transport of atoms through solid material by diffusion is a
   very slow process. Fluids transport dissolved solids to and from
   rock masses (including gold) and thus are instrumental in the
   formation of new minerals.
As temperature increases, devolatilisation occurs and hydrous
minerals recrystallise to anhydrous minerals. The released water
combines with the intergranular fluid. As a result rocks subjected to
high temperature metamorphism tend to have fewer hydrous minerals
(e.g. micas, amphiboles) than those subjected to low temperature
metamorphism.
As pressure increases, the rock density increases and the amount
of pore space decreases, driving the intergranular fluid out of the
rock. High grade metamorphic rocks therefore have higher
densities and anhydrous mineralogy.
As the fluid escapes, it may flow through fractures and some of
the dissolved minerals may be precipitated, resulting in veins. 
As
silica is both common and relatively mobile, quartz veins are most
common, but precipitation of economic deposits (such as gold) may
also occur. 
Gold with Quartz
Many metamorphic rocks preserve these
fluids as tiny liquid inclusions which can be seen under a
petrological microscope.
Time
Any chemical reaction needs time. Mineral reactions are
exceptionally slow. Generally, metamorphic rocks that have undergone
higher pressures and temperatures for longer periods of time tend to
be coarser grained than their lower grade counterparts.
Metamorphic changes that take place while pressure-temperature
conditions are increasing occur when fluid is abundant and are
relatively rapid. This is termed prograde metamorphism. Any
changes that occur when pressure-temperature conditions are declining
are much slower, as a large percentage of the intergranular fluid has
been lost. Such change is known as retrograde metamorphism. As
all metamorphic rocks at the Earth's surface have experienced a
reduction in temperature and pressure, it is only the sluggishness of
retrograde reactions that allows high grade metamorphic rocks to be
seen at the surface.
Parent Rock
As metamorphism involves the recrystallisation of minerals into
more stable phases, the overall chemical composition of the
metamorphic rock must be similar to that of the original parent rock.
Thus mud rocks, rich in Al, will form metamorphic rocks that have
Al-rich minerals, such as micas. A rock with a very limited
mineralogy, however, may undergo textural changes, but may have
little mineralogical change. A quartz-rich sandstone will still only
contain quartz when it is metamorphosed, and a pure limestone will
only contain calcite.


===== metrx_01c.html =====


GeoI Metamorphic Rocks
Metamorphic changes
Metamorphism involves three types of related changes: Textural, Minerological, and Chemical.
Textural changes
Heating and increasing pressures will change the texture of a rock
(its grain size and shape). 
Generally, increases in temperatures
result in the formation of larger mineral grains. 
Under directed
pressure grains may become flattened, distorted and deformed.
Directed pressure will result in the formation of minerals with a
preferred orientation. Naturally platy minerals (biotite, muscovite,
chlorite) and naturally elongate minerals (amphiboles, sillimanite)
develop an alignment which gives the rock a distinct texture.
Foliation is planar texture produced by the alignment of
flattened and platy mineral grains. Lineation is a linear
texture produced by the alignment of elongate mineral grains.
Slaty cleavage is a type of foliation found in very
fine-grained rocks. The platy minerals are too small to be
distinguished with a hand lens. 
Origin of Slaty Cleavage
Schistosity is a type of foliation
found in medium to coarse grained rocks. The platy minerals are large
enough to be distinguished with a hand lens.
New minerals may grow into large crystals surrounded by a much
finer-grained matrix of other minerals. These porphyroblasts
form in the solid state from the chemical ingredients of the rock,
and they grow at the expense of the matrix surrounding it.
 Feldspar Porphyroblasts
 Staurolite Porphyroblasts
Porphyroblasts look something like phenocrysts, the large crystals in
predominantly fine-grained igneous rocks, but the textural relations
are the opposite. Porphyroblasts grew after the main rock matrix was
formed, whereas phenocrysts formed first, after which the matrix
crystallised around them.
Mineralogical changes
During heating and under pressure, minerals break down and may react
with each other to new ones. Many of these minerals are the same as
those which comprise igneous rocks, such as: quartz, feldspar,
amphibole, pyroxene, biotite, and muscovite.
In addition, new minerals are formed which are found almost exclusively
in metamorphic rocks. For example, Regional metamorphic rocks (those formed
in mountain belts - more on this later) exhibit the
metamorphic minerals
chlorite, 
epidote, 
garnet, 
staurolite, 
andalusite, 
sillimanite, and 
kyanite. 
The following table contains a summary of their properties and links to pictures
of them.
Metamorphic Mineral Identification
NONMETALLIC LUSTER (LIGHT COLOR)
 Harder 
    than
    Glass
 Cleavage 
    Prominent
 White-blue, pearly bladelike crystals; 
    H:3; parallel to blades; 7 across
 KYANITE 
    Al Silicate
 White, silky long, thin crystals; H:6
  SILLIMANITE 
    Al Silicate
 White-gray; blocky crystals; alters tomica on surface;
    H:6
  ANDALUCITE 
    Al Silicate
NONMETALLIC LUSTER (DARK COLOR)
 Harder 
    than 
    glass
 Cleavage 
    prominent
 Green to very dark green; one (1) cleavage direction
    (micaceous); occurs 
    in foliated or scaly masses; H:2-2.5
  CHLORITE
    Mg, Fe, Al Silicate
 Bright green to greenish-brown; one (1) cleavage
    direction; H:6
  EPIDOTE 
    Ca, Fe, Al Silicate
 Brown, prismatic, crossed crystals; H:7
 STAUROLITE 
    Fe, Al Silicate
 Cleavage 
    absent
 Red, brown, or yellow; glassy luster; conchoidal
    fracture, common in well- formed twelve (12) sided crystals; H:7-7.5
 GARNET
    Fe, Mg, Ca, Al Silicate
Remembering that most of the materials of the earth are
made up of only a few  elements and that silicon (Si) and oxygen (O) are the
most abundant elements found in crustal rocks, you should not be
surprised to learn that all of these uniquely metamorphic minerals are
also silicates made up of silica tetrahedra bound together by one or
more of the elements:
aluminum (Al), 
iron (Fe), 
calcium (Ca), 
sodium (Na), 
potassium (K), 
and magnesium (Mg). 
All metamorphic minerals except chlorite and epidote occur commonly as
large crystals surrounded by a finer grained groundmass. They look
somewhat like the phenocrysts in porphyritic igneous rocks but have a
very different origin.
New minerals are also formed by contact metamorphism (high T/Low P - more on this
later) in rocks
surrounding igneous intrusions. If the surrounding (country) rock is a
carbonate (limestone or dolomite) and contains some clay or quartz
sand, the metamorphic minerals wollastonite (a calcium silicate) or
diopside (a calcium and magnesium silicate) as well as andalusite and
garnet may form by recrystallization. The heat generated by the high
temperature of the intrusion is sufficient to cause this level of
metamorphism. If hot fluids produced near the intrusion penetrate and
chemically react with the country rock, many new minerals may form
including economically important deposits of lead, zinc, tin and other
ore minerals.
Chemical changes
Intergranular fluids are able to transport material from and to
the rock. Also diffusion of ions through fluids and minerals can
occur. If there is no chemical change at all during metamorphism, the
process is isochemical metamorphism. However, in most cases the loss
of water or carbon dioxide occurs. If there has been some addition or
leaching of chemical components, the process is termed
metasomatism. Mid-ocean spreading ridges are a good place to find hydrothermal vents, metasomatized basalts,
and mineral deposits (see next page for more on this).


===== metrx_01d.html =====


GeoI Metamorphic Rocks
Types of Metamorphism
The main types of metamorphism are contact, regional, burial, dynamic
and metasomatic.  Their occurrance depends on the geologic/tectonic environment
in which the rock exists.  For this reason metamorphic rocks and minerals are excellent
recorders of the Earth's tectonic history.  Here's a crude example:
Contact Metamorphism
Contact Metamorphism is characterised by high temperature, low pressure
conditions, and so is also known as thermal metamorphism.
It is induced by the proximity of a heat source and is therefore
limited to the contact zones adjacent to large igneous intrusive
bodies. The extent of the metamorphism is limited by diffusion of
heat through the rock and the permeability of the rocks to fluids. As
the metamorphism envelopes an igneous intrusion, the zone of
metamorphism is called a metamorphic aureole .
Comparison of contact metamorphism with pottery
Sketch of a Metamorphic Aureole
This type of metamorphism produces a recrystallisation with no
preferred mineral elongation direction, i.e. foliation, resulting in
a massive, hard rock of fused, interlocking grains. The rock is a
called a hornfels. 
Hornfels
Any rock type can be hornfelsed; the name
may be modified by the presence of various porphyroblasts such as
garnet hornfels. A quartz sandstone will recrystallise to a
quartzite. 
Quartzite
A pure limestone will recrystallise to a
marble.
Recrystallisation increases the grain size of the rock, and
typically forms triple junctions between grains.
Burial Metamorphism
Burial metamorphism extends over wide areas and is produced by the
pressures and temperatures involved with deep burial of rocks or
sediment. There is no directed pressure, so there is no preferred
mineral elongation. It is gradational to diagenesis and is generally
defined as beginning when the first new minerals are formed and
crystallise.
Regional metamorphism
Regional metamorphism is characterised by a range of temperature and pressure
conditions. This type of metamorphism is induced by an increasing
geothermal gradient as rocks are buried and differential
stress is created due to the collision of tectonic plates. Thus
regional metamorphism is widespread in continental collision zones. A
foliation appears in the rocks due to the recrystallisation of
minerals (micas) in a direction parallel to the direction of least
stress. As changes in geothermal gradients and pressures will lead to
different mineral reactions, it is possible to observe a series of
distinct minerals within regionally metamorphosed rocks. The mineral
characterising a particular metamorphic mineral assemblage is called an
index mineral, the line connecting the first occurrence of an
index mineral on a map is termed an isograd.
Isograds in the Southern Appalacians
Index Minerals and Grades of Metamorphism
 Approximate 
    Temp. Range
  Metamorphic 
    Grade
 Index Minerals
 Common Mineral Associations
  
 650oC
 HIGH GRADE
    
    
 


    
 SILLIMANITE
    -->
 Quartz, feldspar, biotite, muscovite, garnet
 KYANITE
    
  STAUROLITE
    -->
 Quartz, biotite, muscovite
 400oC
 MEDIUM GRADE
    
    
 


    
 GARNET
  BIOTITE
    -->
 Quartz, muscovite
 150oC
 CHLORITE
    
 LOW GRADE
    
The key diagnostic feature of regional metamorphic rocks is the
development of a foliation due to the differential stresses.
Dynamic metamorphism
This is sometimes called fault-zone metamorphism,
cataclastic metamorphism or dislocation metamorphism
and is characterised low temperatures and high pressures. This type
of metamorphism is produced by a mechanical breakage, rather than
recrystallisation. It is the crushing and grinding that occurs in
fault zones. Initially, only brittle deformation is involved, but it
grades into ductile deformation and shearing in mylonite
zones, where a foliation may develop.
Marble Mylonite
Example of development of Quartz Mylonite
Metasomatism
Metamorphic reactions discussed so far involve relatively fixed
chemical compositions, apart from devolatilisation and the release of
water and carbon dioxide. This is because there is relatively little
fluid in relation to the amount of rock, and the reactions take place
slowly. The fluid provides the pathway for the mobilisation of
elements from one mineral to another, but does not remove enough
elements to noticeably change the rock composition. Where fluid is
abundant, however, ions can be removed in solution or precipitated
from solution and the rock composition changes. Such an alteration of
the rock composition by the movement of fluids is known as
metasomatism. Metasomatic processes are important in the formation of
a number of gold, copper, lead and zinc deposits.
Metasomatism (also called hydrothermal metamorphism)is
commonly associated with contact metamorphism, as the fluids from the
cooling pluton combine with convection currents of groundwater and
pass through the adjacent rocks. These hot fluids (hydrothermal
solutions) are able to carry elements such as silicon, iron,
manganese, copper, lead, zinc or gold in solution. The elements may
be precipitated from the metamorphic solution if the hot fluids meet
reactive rocks, such as limestones. Limestone is particularly
effected as it is relatively porous to fluids. 
Without the addition of new ions, a pure limestone will simply
recrystallise to a marble. With the addition of new elements carried
by the fluid, new minerals other than calcite can crystallise. Close
to the intrusion minerals such as wollastonite, Ca-garnet
(grossularite) and Ca-pyroxene (diopside) crystallise. Further from
the contact, Ca-amphibole and epidote may appear, followed by
chlorite and serpentine, before passing into unaltered limestone. The
resulting rock is called a skarn and may contain economic
concentrations of metals. 
Skarn - marble contact at the Groundhog mine, New Mexico. 
Bleached marble contains 0.1-1.0 cm crinoid stems.
Skarn consists of 1-10 cm crystals of johannsenitic pyroxene which have
grown in bands separated by crystallites of tiny pyroxene fibers.
Pink-red mineral at marble contact is rhodonite. Coin in lower right is
about 1 cm in diameter. 
Gold-bearing vesuvianite and grossular skarn, near Benambra, northeast Victoria. 
 This deposit contains some exotic secondary phosphate and vanadate minerals. 
Similarly, large-scale regional metamorphism may result in the
production of large volumes of metamorphic fluids. These fluids leach
out significant amounts of elements including gold from metamorphic
rocks. The hot fluids are forced to travel to cooler, higher parts of
the crust where gold may be deposited in quartz veins. The
gold-bearing quartz veins in Victoria are a good example for such
metamorphic fluid migration and precipitation processes.
Large-scale metasomatism is also operating at the mid-ocean ridges. Seawater penetrates into
the diverging plates and is heated. A convection current is formed,
and as the heated seawater rises (as a vapour) it alters the
ultramafic mantle rocks. 
Olivine and pyroxene are altered to
serpentine, chlorite, epidote and talc. This is known as
serpentinisation. 
Serpentine
The percolation of the seawater deep into
the crust, leaches copper, lead and zinc and other elements from the
rocks. As the fluids rise along the mid-ocean ridges they eject into
the seawater metal-rich plumes, known as black smokers. The sudden temperature change
causes the metals to precipitate from the hydrothermal fluids. As a
result the seafloor becomes covered with metal-rich oozes.


===== metrx_02a.html =====


GeoI Metamorphic Rocks
Metamorphic Rocks
Most of the Earth's crust consists of metamorphic rock. We are not
usually aware of this because the oceans and a thin veneer of
sediment often cover these crystalline rocks. Also the formation of
metamorphic rocks is not an obvious process because it occurs below
the Earth's surface. It cannot be observed taking place. It is also
an extremely slow process. However, geologists know a lot about
metamorphic rocks because these rocks become exposed at the Earth's
surface as a result of erosion.
Metamorphic rocks are important rocks because 
they contain information about temperatures and pressures
   experienced by a particular part of the crust in the past, 
from them we can learn about the evolution of the crust
   through time, 
some of the oldest rocks on Earth are metamorphic in origin,
   
many metal deposits are
   hosted by metamorphic rocks, 
important industrial mineral deposits (e.g. marble or slate)
   are the result of metamorphism, and 
some fossil records are found in metamorphic rocks.
As previously noted out, the mineralogy and texture of a
metamorphic rock will depend on the original composition of the rock
and the pressure-temperature-fluid conditions that the rock has been
subjected to. Thus metamorphic rocks have been named partly after
their texture and also partly after their mineral assemblage. A
simplified approach in dealing with metamorphic rocks is to look at
the metamorphism of individual parent rock types under various P-T
conditions.


===== metrx_02b.html =====


GeoI Metamorphic Rocks
Compositional Rock Types
We can divide most rocks into four general categories:
Pelitic
high in Al
clay-rich rocks such as mudstones and shales
when metamorphosed they turn into rocks that have a high mica
   content and, at intermediate to high grade metamorphism,
   frequently contain aluminosilicate (andalusite, kyanite and
   sillimanite - Al2SiO5).
Basic
high in Fe, Mg and Ca
basalts and gabbros containing primarily pyroxene and
   plagioclase.
when metamorphosed they retain their dark colour, and will
   contain plagioclase with chlorite, amphibole or pyroxene,
   depending on the metamorphic grade.
Quartzo-feldspathic
high in Si
sandstones, arkose, granitoids, rhyolites with a high quartz
   and/or feldspar content
when metamorphosed, they retain their high percentage of
   quartz and feldspar. The major change is a change of texture.
Calcareous
high in Ca and Mg
limestones and dolomites
when metamorphosed, contain minerals that are Ca-rich, such as
   calcite, wollastonite (CaSiO3), grossularite
   (Ca-garnet), and diopside (Ca-pyroxene).
Each of these compositional types can be subjected to varying
grades of each of the above types of metamorphism to form metamorphic
rock.


===== metrx_02c.html =====


GeoI Metamorphic Rocks
Regional Metamorphism of Pelitic Rocks
Pelitic rocks are fine grained mudstones, siltstones and shales
that contain a high percentage of clays, with lesser quartz and
variable amounts of calcite. Their high Al content leads to a high
percentage of micas in the resulting metamorphic rock.
Differential stress aligns the micas, so a pronounced
foliation is developed. The following rock types are developed
from low grade to high grade (i.e. increasing P-T conditions). 
Textural Subdivision of Foliated Metamorphic Rocks.
 Name
  Foliation & Cleavage
 Grain Size
 SLATE
 Very fine foliation and excellent cleavage 
    that produces very smooth, lustrous surfaces
 Aphanitic
 PHYLLITE
 Very fine foliation and good cleavage; surfaces may
    be wrinkled and usually have a silky sheen
 Aphanitic
    to very fine grained
phaneritic
 SCHIST
 Finely foliated; moderately good cleavage
 Phaneritic
    fine to medium grained
 GNEISS
 Coarsely foliated or banded poor cleavage
  Phaneritic
    fine to 
    coarse grained
Slate
Under low-grade metamorphism, fine grains of chlorite and/or
muscovite crystallise, with their cleavage directions parallel to the
direction of least stress. The alignment of the fine micas gives the
rock a foliation known as "slaty cleavage".  Note that the term
cleavage here refers to the breakage of the rock between mineral
grains, rather than a mineral cleavage which is the breakage of a
mineral between planes of atoms within the crystal. The slaty cleavage
allows the rock to be split into smooth slabs that are suitable for
roofing tiles, floor tiles and high quality billiard tables. The
recrystallisation of the grains makes slate harder than shale, and so a
better building material, and is relatively impermeable perpendicular
to the foliation. Individual grains are too fine to see giving it a
dull lustre.  The rock is commonly dark grey, but may be red,
indicating the presence of iron oxide, green if significant chlorite is
present, and black if it contains organic material.
Slate
Slate in-situ
Phyllite
With low to intermediate grade metamorphism, the micas become
larger, such that they are just visible and the rock develops a sheen
as light reflects off the aligned micas. Biotite may start to
crystallise. The rock has a distinct foliation. Colours are similar
to those of slates.
Schist
With increasing metamorphic grade, further significant growth of
micas is achieved which are now big enough to be recognised with the
unaided eye. With the coarsening of the micas, the rock becomes quite
shiny as light reflects off the larger, aligned micas. Under these
higher P-T conditions, chlorite is unstable and breaks down to
produce new minerals. New, large minerals that crystallise due to
metamorphism are known as "porphyroblasts". These include the
aluminosilicates (andalusite, kyanite and sillimanite -
Al2SiO5). Aluminosilicates are common in
metamorphosed pelitic rocks, due to the release of Al as the lower
grade micas, such as chlorite, break down. Other porphyroblasts
include cordierite, staurolite, biotite, garnet and K-feldspar. As
particular minerals are stable at particular P-T conditions, mineral
assemblages help to define the P-T conditions to which the rock has
been subjected. The porphyroblasts tend to disrupt the foliation,
which is known as a schistosity.
Schist
Talc Schist
Mica Schist With Garnets
Schist Outcrop in Southeast Vermont
Gneiss
Under high grade metamorphism, the porphyroblasts grow larger,
disrupting the schistosity. At these P-T conditions, muscovite reacts
with quartz to produce K-feldspar and one of the aluminosilicates
(depending on the P-T conditions). Temperatures are around
600C. The proportion of micas to granular minerals is thus
reduced, and so the foliation is less pronounced. The micaceous
layers become segregated from the quartz-feldspar rich layers,
leading to the development of light and dark coloured bands, known as
"compositional layering". The separation of the light coloured
quartz and feldspar from the dark coloured biotite and pyroxenes is a
form of metamorphic differentiation.
GNEISS
GNEISS Outcrop in Big Horn Mtns, Wyoming
Gneiss (pronounced "nice") is typically found in the eroded
remnants of the cores of ancient mountain ranges. At he highest
grades, with temperatures around 700 - 800C, the felsic layers
may be partially melted, whereas the mafic layers, which have a
higher melting point, remain solid. Such rocks are called
migmatites. With increasing grade, the entire rock may melt,
and an igneous granite will form.
MIGMATITE Outcrop in Big Falls, Wisconsin


===== metrx_02d.html =====


GeoI Metamorphic Rocks
Contact Metamorphism of Pelitic Rocks
Hornfels
Because there is no directional stress applied during contact
metamorphism, contact metamorphic rocks do not develop a foliation.
Recrystallisation, however, produces fused, interlocking grains,
leading to a hard, fine-grained, massive rock called a hornfels . The
name may be modified by the presence of various porphyroblasts, such
as, in order of increasing metamorphic grade,
cordierite hornfels
andalusite hornfels and
garnet hornfels.
Andluscite Hornfels
Note that andalusite is the only aluminosilicate that is formed by
contact metamorphism - kyanite and sillimanite require higher
pressure conditions. The highest grade hornfels are found in contact
with the intrusive body that supplied the heat for the
metamorphism.


===== metrx_02e.html =====


GeoI Metamorphic Rocks
Regional Metamorphism of Basalts
Basaltic rocks (basalt lava & pyroclastics, dolerite, gabbro)
are rich in Fe, Mg and Ca and are composed essentially of
plagioclase, pyroxene and olivine, which are all anhydrous minerals.
Under conditions where H2O is present, basaltic rocks show
a progression of associated minerals with increasing metamorphic
grade.
Metabasalt
The lowest grade rocks contain a variety of zeolite minerals
formed by the alteration of volcanic glass. There is some development
of chlorite, epidote and calcite as the mafic minerals recrystallise,
but at this early stage of metamorphism, they retain much of their
original characteristics and are named by the addition of the prefix
meta-, such as meta-basalt, meta-dolerite, etc.
Chlorite altered basalt of the Cromwell Metabasalt within the Eastern creek Volcanics, Australia.
Greenschist
Under low grade regional metamorphism, the high-temperature
Ca-plagioclase is converted to the low-temperature Na-plagioclase,
albite, while the anhydrous pyroxene and olivine are replaced by the
hydrous minerals chlorite, epidote and actinolite (an amphibole). The
mafic minerals gives the rock a green colour and the rock develops a
foliation - hence the name "greenschist". 
Photograph of a handsample representing the greenschist facies. This
sample contains actinolite, chlorite, epidote, and sphene.
Amphibolite
During intermediate grade metamorphism, chlorite and epidote break
down and hornblende crystallises. There is a foliation defined by the
alignment of the elongate amphiboles, but this foliation is not as
pronounced as that developed by mica rich schists. the rock is
composed essentially of plagioclase and hornblende, but may have
minor calcite and garnet.
Photograph of a handsample representing the amphibolite facies. This sample contains plagioclase, hornblende, and quartz.
Granulite
During high grade metamorphism, amphiboles are replaced by
pyroxene, as water is expelled. The foliation is indistinct, defined
by alignment of pyroxenes. Granulites are essentially composed of
plagioclase and pyroxene with some garnet. Note that this composition
is not much different from that of an intrusive igneous rock, the
gabbro, although the textures are different and garnet is present as
a minor mineral in granulites rather than olivine in gabbros.
Granulite facies rocks from Namaqualand, South Africa.
Hand sample of a Granulite.
Eclogite
At extreme P-T conditions such as those experienced at the base of
the crust, basaltic rocks react to form garnet and a distinctive
green pyroxene called omphacite.
Photograph of a hand sample representing the eclogite facies. This sample contains garnet, quartz, omphacite, and orthopyroxene.
A microphotograph of an eclogite sample. 
Black is garnet and the colored crystals are omphacite.
Blueschist
Under conditions of high pressure but low temperature, a sodic
amphibole called glaucophane crystallises. This is a blue
colour and rocks formed under these conditions are called
blueschists. These low temperature - high pressure conditions are
indicative of subduction zones, where cold surface rocks are rapidly
dragged down the subduction zone to regions of high pressure.
GLAUCOPHANE 
Blueschist; 
Siphnos, Greece
Blue is the natural color of glaucophane in plane-polarized light. You
can see that individual crystals vary from blue to lavender to colorless
depending on their orientation. The crystals have a zillion orientations in
the three-dimensional world of the rock, but keep in mind that the thin
section is only a two-dimensional slice. Plane polarized light interacts in
specific ways with grains that are positioned differently to the light path.
The slight color variations that result serve to identify glaucophane
because only two other very rare minerals show comparable color.
Rocks that contain abundant glaucophane are called blueschists.


===== metrx_02f.html =====


GeoI Metamorphic Rocks
Contact Metamorphism of Basalts
In a similar manner to the contact metamorphism of a sedimentary
rock, basaltic rocks will also recrystallise to massive rocks with no
foliation, producing a hornfels. Again, the name may be
modified by the presence of indicator minerals such as, in order of
increasing metamorphic grade
epidote hornfels
hornblende hornfels
pyroxene hornfels.
In general, hornfelses may be prefixed by their characteristic
minerals (as above), or by compositional terms such as a
calc-silicate hornfels, basic hornfels, etc.


===== metrx_02g.html =====


GeoI Metamorphic Rocks
Metamorphism of Quartzo-Feldspathic Rocks
Quartzite
Quartz sandstones do not contain the necessary elements to form
platy minerals, so they commonly form with no outstanding preferred
orientation or foliation. Metamorphism of pure quartz sandstones leads
to the development of an interlocking mosaic of crystals. Such a
texture is called granoblastic. The recrystallisation of the
cement surrounding the original grains is as strong as the bonds within
the quartz crystals, so quartzites tend to break through both the
original grains and the recrystallised cement.  The lack of index
minerals makes it difficult to determine the metamorphic grade that the
rock was subjected to.
Gneissic Granite / Granitic Gneiss
Granites do not show much change with metamorphism, as the
minerals are already stable at high pressures and temperatures due to
their formation under similar conditions. Differential stress,
however, will produce some recrystallisation and the rock will
develop a foliation. As the rock is still essentially an igneous
rock, it is called a "foliated granite". Under high grade
metamorphism, any muscovite present will break down to produce
K-feldspar, and the rock may develop some compositional layering.
Such a rock is generally called a gneissic granite if it looks more
like a granite than a gneiss, or a granitic gneiss if it looks more
like a gneiss.
Granitic gneiss from the Smoky Mtns with foliation defined by bands of black biotite mica and white plagioclase feldspar is exposed near Cherokee.  At 1 billion years old they are the oldest rocks in the Smokies.


===== metrx_02h.html =====


GeoI Metamorphic Rocks
Metamorphism of Calcareous Rocks
Marble
Pure limestone is composed predominantly of calcite. When this is
metamorphosed, the calcite recrystallises, but remains as calcite.
There are no other elements to combine with the  calcite to produce
new minerals. The resulting rock is a marble. Because there are no
new minerals growing with increasing metamorphic grade, it is
difficult to determine the conditions that the rock was subjected to.
As marble is not a platy mineral, it may not display a distinct
foliation, but there is generally some indication of alignment of
minerals in a regionally metamorphosed marble.
Byzantium carving in marble
Calc-silicate Rocks
Where clays and silica is also present in the limestone, such as
will occur in muddy limestones and sandy limestones respectively, the
addition of different elements allows the crystallisation of new
minerals. Quartz and calcite will react to form wollastonite,
whereas if clays are present vesuvianite (idiocrase) may be formed.
WOLLASTONITE
VESUVIANITE
Wollastonite has long, white tabular crystals. Vesuvianite has brown
to green prismatic crystals. Other minerals present carbonates,
chlorite, epidote, Ca-amphiboles, Ca-garnet (grossularite), and
plagioclase, all of which contain Ca. Recall these minerals are
created with limestone
is metasomatized in the presence of a hot intrusion to produce a
scarn.
GROSSULARITE
The lack of platy minerals means that any foliation developed
during regional metamorphism may be weak.  


===== metrx_02i.html =====


GeoI Metamorphic Rocks
Summaries of the more common Metamorphic Rocks
Metamorphic Rocks Produced by Regional Metamorphism
 Material & Composition
 Increasing Metamorphic Grade
 Limestone 
    CA+2, Co-2
 ___________________Marble_______________>
    (Crystalline Calcite)
 Quartz Sandstone
SiO2
 __________________Quartzite________________>
    (Recrystallized Quartz)
 Mudstone or Shale
    SiO-44, Al+3, Fe+2, Mg+2,
    Ca+2, H+, O-2
  __Slate_____>Phyllite_____>Schist_____>Gneiss
    Chlorite_____ Muscovite_____ Garnet_____
    Sillimanite
 Basalt 
    Fe+2, 
    Mg+2,Ca+2,SiO-44
Metabasalt____>
Greenschist____>
Amphibolite__>
Granulite__>
Ecologite
 Granite
    Na+, K+,SiO-44, Ca+2,
    Al+3
 _________________ No Change________>Granite Gneiss 
    (Granite originally 
    formed at high 
    temperature/pressure)
Classification of Metamorphic Rocks
 Texture
 Composition
 Rock Name
 F
    O
    L
    I
    A
    T
    E
    D
 VERY FINE
 
 C
    h
    l
    o
    r
    i
    t
    e

 M
    i
    c
    a


 Q
    u
    a
    r
    t
    z
 


F
    e
    l
    d
    s
    p
    a
    r
 


A
    m
    p
    h
    i
    b
    o
    l
    e
 


P
    y
    r
    o
    x
    e
    n
    e
 SLATE
 FINE
  PHYLLITE
 MEDIUM
  SCHIST
 COARSE
 GNEISS
 Foliated to nonfoliated, medium to coarse grained
 Variable but fine quartz and micas are common
 AMPHIBOLITE
 N
    O
    N
    F
    O
    L
    I
    A
    T
    E
    D
 COARSE GRAINED
 Deformed fragments of any rock type
 METACONGLOMERATE
 FINE TO MEDIUM GRAINED
 Quartz
  QUARTZITE
 Calcite & dolomite
  MARBLE
 FINE GRAINED
 Hornblende & plagioclase
  HORNFELS
 Carbonaceous material
 BITUMINOUS COAL

ANTHRACITE COAL


===== metrx_03.html =====


GeoI Metamorphic Rocks
Metamorphic Facies, Zones, and Environments
The study of metamorphic rocks can provide a wealth of information about the
tectonic history of a region, because the minerals that form, combined with 
radiometric dating, allow us to construct a Pressure-Temperature-Time (PTT)
path from which we can infer a region's history.
We already discussed index minerals that form in a certain range of
P-T conditions.  However, more precise definition of P-T can be determined
by looking at groups or assemblages of minerals that coexist in
a narrowly determined range of P and T.  These assemblages, and by extention
the P-T conditions that create them, are called Metamorphic Facies.
The following diagram shows metamorphic facies in
relation to Pressure and Temperature.

Key reactions include the out going of chlorite marking the
greenschist - amphibolite boundary in the reaction chlorite +
muscovite + quartz -> cordierite + aluminosilicate + biotite +
H2O.
A key reaction marking the amphibolite - granulite boundary is the
out going of muscovite in the reaction of muscovite + quartz ->
K-feldspar + aluminosilicate + H2O.
That is, amphibolite facies rocks do not contain chlorite and
granulite facies rocks do not contain muscovite.
The following is a summary of mineral characteristics in some of the different facies:
Zeolite Facies 
Zeolites are groups of white to colourless hydrous alumina silicates, analogous in
composition to feldspars. 
Laumontite, heulandite and analcine are common, the assemblage Quartz + Laumontite +
Chlorite is diagnostic.
Prehnite - Pumpellyite 
Prehnite +/- Pumpellyite + Quartz is typical. 
Prehnite - Ca2Al2Si3O10(OH)2;
 Pumpellyite -
 Ca2MgAl2(SiO4)(Si2O7)(OH)2H2O 
Glaucophane - Lawsonite Schist or Blueschist
High P Low T 
Glaucophane (Na2MgAl2Si8O22(OH)2) (alkali-rich amphibole) + Lawsonite
(CaAl2Si2O7(OH)2H2O) are characteristic
            also 
Jadiete (NaAlSi2O6) + Quartz + Aragonite 
Greenschist 
 
Albite + Epidote + Actinolite + Chlorite + Calcite in mafic rocks 
 pyrophyllite in pelitic rocks 
Amphibolite 
 Hornblende + Plagioclase (An > 20) 
Kyanite (Al2SiO5) in pelites 
Granulite
lower crustal lithology 
clinopyroxene + orthopyroxine + plagioclase + Fe - Mg garnet 
Eclogite 
lower crust or upper mantle lithology 
Feldspar-free assemblages, with jadiete-rich clinopyroxene + pyrope (Mg-rich garnet) 
Metamorphic Zones
As rocks of the same chemical composition have different mineral
assemblages, and rocks with the same mineral assemblages represent
similar metamorphic facies, then by selecting characteristic index
minerals, regions of similar metamorphic grade can be mapped in the
field. The line that indicates where these index minerals first
appear is known as an isograd . The region between
isograds is a metamorphic zone . Thus the first
appearance of biotite in a metamorphic rock defines the biotite
isograd, and the biotite zone continues until the in coming of the
next highest index mineral. Note that biotite may continue to occur
in the higher metamorphic zones.
The concept of metamorphic zones was pioneered by a Scottish
geologist, Barrows, in the Sottish highlands, where the index
minerals, in order of increasing metamorphic grade, are chlorite -
biotite - garnet - staurolite - kyanite - sillimanite. This
characteristic metamorphic facies series is now known as Barrovian
series metamorphism.
Plate Tectonics, Metamorphism and Time
Certain metamorphic facies are indicative of particular
structural, or plate tectonic settings. Microstructural examination
of metamorphic rocks often allows you to see relationships between
past metamorphic events that allow an interpretation of the tectonic
history of the rock. 
In the above Curve A represents a probable geothermal gradient which would
extend outward (including upward) from an intrusive igneous rock during
cooling of the magmatic intrusive. Heat transfer would induce contact
metamorphism within the surrounding rocks. Curve B is a normal
geothermal gradient. Curve C is the geothermal gradient of a typical
subduction zone. Note that subduction brings cool rocks from the
Earth's surface down into a high-pressure regime.
These histories can be plotted on a P-T diagram,
with an indication of a time (t) component. Two examples are shown
below.
P-T-t Paths of Blueschist Metamorphism
Blueschists are indicative of subduction zones. Cold, crustal
   rocks (at t1) are dragged down by the rapidly
   subducting plate. They are thus subjected to a rapid increase in
   pressure, but are still relatively cool. These are the conditions
   of blueschist metamorphism, shown below on the diagram at time
   t2. It is known as blueschist due to the presence of
   the amphibole glaucophane, which gives the rock a characteristic
   blue colour. Buoyancy of the low density, crustal rocks stabilises
   their position in the crust, or may lead to a release of pressure,
   but the temperature of the rocks rises in keeping with their deep
   burial (time t3). As the rocks rise to the surface,
   pressures and temperatures decrease in keeping with the geothermal
   gradient. Retrograde metamorphism may occur (time t4).
   The P-T-t path of such a tectonic history delineates a clockwise
   path on a P-T diagram, as shown below.
   
P-T-t Paths of Collision Zone Regional Metamorphism
On the landward or volcanic arc side of a subduction zone,
   magmas formed by the wet partial melting of the subducting plate
   rise through the overriding plate to high levels in the crust and
   heat the crustal rocks (t1) to t2). Note
   that the volume of melt involved leads to regional scale heating.
   Contact metamorphism would also occur adjacent to each intrusion.
   As the continents collide and the lithosphere thickens, pressure
   increases for the deeper rocks, with an increase in temperature,
   but at a lesser rate (t3). As later uplift and erosion
   progressively exposes the deeply buried rocks, pressures and
   temperatures subside and retrograde metamorphism may take place
   (t4). The P-T-t path of such a tectonic history
   delineates an anti-clockwise path on a P-T diagram, as shown
   below.
   
The above provides an explantion for metamorphism commonly found near
old plate boundaries.  In 1961, Akiho Miyashiro noted that in the
cicumpacific region, belts of  high pressure, low temperature
metamorphism on the oceanic side were associated with belts of high
pressure, high temperature metamorphism on the continent side.  He
termed such an occurrence Paired Metamorphic Belts.  The two examples
he cited are:
Japan, where the Sanbagawa Belt represents the high pressure, low
temperature belt, and an adjacent belt, called
the Ryoke-Abukuma Belt, represents the high pressure, high
temperature belt.  Here the Ryoke-Abukuma belt consists of
Barrovian and Buchan Facies series metamorphic rocks.
The western U.S., where the Franciscan complex contains rocks
metamorphosed at high pressure and low temperature, and rocks exposed
in the Klamath Mountains and Sierra Nevada Mountains have remnants of
Barrovian and Buchan Facies Series metamorphic rocks.   Since most of
the Sierra Nevada mountains now consist of batholiths, as discussed
previously, one had to look at the roof pendants above the batholiths
and in the western foothills of the Sierra Nevada to see the high
pressure - high temperature metamorphic rocks.
In the case of the Japanese paired belts, the two belts are adjacent to
one another likely because subduction has moved
 farther off the coast. Compressional tectonics between the Pacific and
 Eurasian Plate has accreted the island arc and trench complex to Japan
 at the end of the Mesozoic.
 In the case of the western U.S., the paired belts are separated from
one another.  This is because the oceanic ridge that
 was off the western coast of North America was subducted, and the
 margin changed from one dominated by compression and subduction to a
 transform fault margin dominated by strike slip faulting.  Isostatic
 rebound of the highly deformed Franciscan Complex has resulted in its
 exposure at the surface.


