===== interior_01.html =====


GeoI Lecture Notes on Earth's Interior
Geo I
The Earth's Interior:
Way Down Inside
How do we know what is below the Earth's surface?  We get clues from 
Extrusive igneous rocks
Drilling
Geological section of the Kola Super Deep Borehole derived from nearly continuous core extraction. 
One of the most widespread urban legends is the story of the
  Russian scientists who drilled so deeply into the earth's crust that they
  accidentally broke through into hell. 
The SAFOD Drilling project, which will monitor the San Andreas Fault at Depth. 
Meterorites
Part of the Allende Meteorite, a carbonaceous chrondrite
All are helpful, but the best evidence we have comes from analysis of
the physical properties of the Earth, which is the realm of
Geophysics, and subdisciplines like seismology, potential field
geophysics (gravity and magnetics), geoelectricity, and heat flow.
Because rocks are "opaque" we learn deduce all we know by inference, but is this
any different from what we have been discussing so far (time vs. space)?


===== interior_02.html =====


GeoI Lecture Notes on Earth's Interior
Interpreting Seismograms:  The Wonder Wiggles
The best pictures we have of the Earth's interior come from the field of SEISMOLOGY, in
which we analyze the way in which vibrations propogate through the Earth.
Some definitions:
Seismogram:  A record of ground motion.  Could be analog 
or digital
A foreshock-mainshock-aftershock sequence
Seismometer:  A sensor that converts ground motion into 
an electrical signal.  Also called a Geophone.
Simplified Diagram
Examples of Geophones
Modern Seismometers in China
Seismograph:  The instrument used to record the electrical 
signals.
This model of an ancient Chinese Seismograph
is in the shape of a watchtower in a Han period frontier village.
Helicorders, or Drum Recorders, which have been the standard for many years.
A RefTek Data Acquistion System installed in Kyrgyzstan
Seismometers work just like a phonograph needle; or, if 
you like, a speaker in reverse:  Inertial mass on a spring 
with a magnet moving through a coil of wire.
The waves produced by an earthquake arrive at a point as 
distinct "phases".  We can use these phases to tell us a lot 
about the earthquake source and the earth structure.
Example:  location of an epicenter can be accomplished by 
the S-P time.
Aside:  We know now that most earthquakes are shallow 
(
More sophisticated processing can reveal the nature of the 
rupture process.


===== interior_03.html =====


GeoI Lecture Notes on Earth's Interior
Earth Structure
We can use arrival times and amplitudes of phases to 
determine the interior structure of the Earth.  In fact, most 
of what we know about the interior of the Earth comes from 
this kind of information.  Seismic waves are like the X rays 
of the Earth.  We can CAT-scan the Earth.
Here are the basic steps:
Identification of a phase as a coherent arrival.
Explanation of this phase in the context of an Earth 
model.
There are two basic ways to do this:
Active source seismology, in which you create your own energy souce (an explosion or 
a weight drop, for example).
Accelerated Weight Drop Source
Passive source seismology, in which you rely on natural sources of energy (like earthquakes). 
There are real advantages to using active sources, such as high resolution image production, but
the energies involved only allow us to investigate crustal depth stucture (at most).
Details:
Changes in structure cause waves to bend and refract.  
Smooth variations cause bending, sharp variations cause 
new kinds of phases to be generated, including some reflections.
Reflected Wave
Critically Refracted Wave
Refracted Wave
Curved Ray in a Gradually increasing Velocity Medium
We start by constructing a one-dimensional model of the 
Earth.  Main features are:
	Crust, Mantle, Outer Core, Inner Core
Secondary Features:
Lithosphere, Low Velocity Zone (asthenosphere), Phase Transitions in Upper 
Mantle, Variations in Crustal thickness.
Details of the crust:
The crust is thicker beneath continents (10-70 km) than it is beneath oceans (5-8 km).  
Vp in oceans is
about 7.0 km/s and in continents is about 6.0 km/s.  Composition:  basalt vs. granite.
Continental crust is complicated, oceanic crust is simple.
 The boundary between the crust and mantle is called the Mohorovicic Discontinuity after
the seismologist who first discovered it.
Details of the mantle:
 Vp in upper mantle about 8 km/s; should be ultramafic (no feldspar; lots of olivene and pyroxene).
 Velocity increases until about 125 -200 km depth, then reverses in the asthenosphere, where rocks
flow easily and may be partially melted.  The asthenosphere extends to depths of about 200 km, and may
or may not exist beneath all continents.
 Phase changes at 400 and 670 km depth.  Olivene -> Spinel -> Perovskite.
Same composition; different structure.
 Composition is more or less homogeneous due to convection, but some lateral variations exist.
 We can determine anistropy from shear wave splitting.
Details of the core:
 We know the outer core is liquid because of the shadow zone for shear waves and strong refraction for
P waves.
 Other phases show that the inner core is solid.  Looking at changes in anistropy over time show that
the inner core is rotating.
 The core is dense ( 10-13 gr/cc) and appears to be composed of Fe and Ni, along with some sulpher.
Fe and Ni are consistent with wave velocities and with meteorites.  Existence of magnetic field provides
more evidence.
As we become more sophisticated in imaging, we produce 3D 
structures (laterally varying).  Main features:
	Hot and cold areas of the interior related to mantle 
convection.
	Variations in the depth of the Core-Mantle boundary.
	Local and regional variations in structure.


===== interior_04.html =====


GeoI Lecture Notes on Earth's Interior
Active Source Seismology (Exploration)
Seismic imaging works so well that oil companies spend 
about 90% of their exploration budget collecting data from 
artificial sources (explosions or vibrators).
Techniques are REFLECTION and REFRACTION.
At a small scale, a sledge hammer can produce nice 
pictures of the near-surface.
Techniques works well in a variety of environments.  
Particularly good on water (easier to move equipment 
around).


===== interior_05.html =====


GeoI Lecture Notes on Earth's Interior
The Attractions of Gravity
In the beginning, Newton said:
F = GM1M2/R2
Which means that if there are two masses (whatever that means)
M1 and M2 separated by a distance R, they will
exert a mutually attractive force on each other that is proportional to
the product of the masses and inversely proportional to the square of
the distance between them.
This is a weak force; you don't have to worry about walking past a building and
becoming bonded to it.  However, if a body has a lot of mass, like for example
a planet, gravity becomes noticeable.  
Let's assign one of the masses to be the mass of Earth (Me),
and remember that Newton also pointed out that:
F = MA
where A is an acceleration.  If M1 is some mass at the surface of the Earth, we
can write:
F = M1 (GMe/Re2) = M1g
where "g" is the acceleration due to gravity at the surface (Re = Radius of the
Earth).  Then
g = F/M1 = GMe/Re2 ~ 9.8 m/s2
Now, IF the density of the Earth were radially symmetric and the Earth did not
spin, g would be the same everywhere on the surface.  But density does vary, and
in fact being able to map out variations in density provides some important clues
about the nature of the subsurface.  
The measurement of g, or at least variations of g, is not difficult to do.  The
trick is knowing how to interpret your measurements as evidence of variations in
density.  Why is this difficult?  Because we know that the following items also
cause g to change:
Changes in Latitude, because the Earth is spinning.
Changes in Elevation, because gravity changes like 1/R2
Changes in Time, because of tidal attractions of the Sun and Moon.
Changes in Terrain, because solid rock is replaced by air in valleys (or
	air by rock in mountains).
Despite all these corrections you have to make, you can still come up with
	a pretty good idea of what part of the change in g is due to density
	variations.


===== interior_06.html =====


GeoI Lecture Notes on Earth's Interior
What can we learn from Gravity studies?  
Many things, but here are a couple
of the most important ideas:
LARGE SCALE:
As a result of gravity measurements, we know that, to first order, the
Earth's crust "floats" on the mantle just like ice cubes in water.
This idea is called "Isostacy" (= "equal standing").  Thus, like the
tip of an iceberg, a mountain is just the tip of a much greater
thickness of crust below it (by a factor of about 5;  thus, a 2 km high
mountain is compensated by an extra 10 km of crust beneath it).  Thus,
we can use elevations as well as gravity anomalies to estimate the thickness of the crust.
The first person to detect this was Pierre Bouguer, although he thought
the explanation for the mass deficit was "hollow mountains".  The real
reason was proposed by Airy, a British scientist, about 100 years ago.
Loads on the lithosphere cause it to bend, which also makes for a lateral
variation in density.  Thus, long wavelength variations in gravity have been
used to determine the strength of the lithosphere in different parts of the world.
Isostacy also explains why some mountains (like the Appalacians) can persist despite
millions of years of erosion, and why places like Norway and Canada are shooting up
out of the water (post glacial rebound).
SMALL SCALE:
Gravity observations are very useful in mapping out areas of low density, such
as sediment filled basins.  This can be useful for groundwater exploration, for
example.  In New York, gravity data can be used to map out old river channels where
water resources are likely to be found.


===== interior_07.html =====


GeoI Lecture Notes on Earth's Interior
Magnetic Appeal
It has been known for about 500 years the the Earth has its own magnetic field.
For the most part, the Earth's magnetic field looks like one that would be
generated from a dipolar magnetic source located at the center of the
Earth. The strength of the magnetic field at the poles is about
50,000 NanoTeslas (gammas), and probably is generated mostly by convection in
the outer core.
This description  was first given by Sir William Gilbert in 1600.
If the dipole were aligned with the rotation axis of the Earth, a description of the
field would be simple.  Unfortunately it is not, so we must worry about the inclination
and declination (i.e., direction) of the field at any point on Earth.
Also the field changes with time in an unpredictable way!
Thus, we generally interpret relative fields rather than the absolute field.  Still,
it can get pretty complicated.  Fortunately, the measurements are made very easily.
Rocks have a "magnetic susceptibility" which means that they can produce a secondary field when
in the presence of a primary field.  What we measure is the total field.  
When some minerals cool below the Curie point (about 600oC) they can
retain an induced magnetism. Because the magnetic field has been know
to reverse polarity several times in the past.  This gives us another
time scale to use in determining Earth history (paleomagnetics).


===== interior_08.html =====


GeoI Lecture Notes on Earth's Interior
Heat Flow
Measurements of heat flow tell us about temperature gradients within the Earth (geothermal gradients).
We know that near surface, this gradient is about 25oC/km but decreases to 1oC/km in the mantle.  Temperatures
at the center of the Earth approach 7000oC.
Heat flow measurements can tell us if anomalously hot bodies are near the surface.  On average, heat flow
beneath oceans and continents is about the same.


