===== igneous_outline.html =====


GeoI Lecture Notes: Igneous Rocks
Geology I
Igneous Rocks: Lecture Outline
Introduction
Magmas

Partial Melting
What Causes Rocks to Melt?
Heat
Pressure
Water
Composition of Magma
Viscosity of Magma
Silica Content
Cations
Temperature
Volatiles
Relative Abundance of Igneous Rock Types

What Happens When the Magma Cools?

Bowen's Reaction Series
Discontinuous Reaction Series
Continuous Reaction Series: Crystallisation of Plagioclase
Plagioclase Zoning
Varieties of Magma
Source Rocks
Partial Melting
Fractional Crystallisation
Magma Mixing
Assimilation
Igneous Textures
Grain Size
Effect of Cooling Rate
Plutonic/Intrusive rocks
Volcanic/Extrusive rocks
Hypabyssal rocks
Phaneritic vs Aphanitic
Degree of Crystallinity
Effect of Volatiles
Grain Size Variations
PORPHYRY
Grain Shape
Summary of Igneous Structures
interlocking grains
massive
phenocrysts
xenoliths
vesicles
amygdules
miarolytic cavities
zoned crystals
flow structure
volcanic glass
aplites
pegmatites
graphic granite
The Classification of Igneous Rocks

A More Complete Overview of Classification
Plutonic Rocks
Acid Plutonic Rocks
Intermediate Plutonic Rocks
Basic Plutonic Rocks
Ultrabasic Plutonic Rocks
Hypabyssal Rocks (Minor Intrusives)
Volcanic Rocks
Acid Volcanic Rocks
Intermediate Volcanic Rocks
Basic Volcanic Rocks
Ultrabasic Volcanic Rocks
Pyroclastic Rocks
Fragment Size
Fragment Type
Composition
Ignimbrites
Where Does Magma Come From?

The Origin of Basaltic Magma
Oceanic Basalts
Continental Basalts
The Origin of Andesitic Magma
The Origin of Rhyolitic Magma
Intrusive Landforms

Major (Plutonic) Intrusions
Batholiths
Stocks
Laccoliths
Lopoliths
Minor (Hypabyssal) Intrusions
Dykes
Sills
Volcanic Necks / Plugs
Ring Dykes
Cone Sheets
Eruption of Magma & Volcanic Hazards

Basaltic Eruptions
Basaltic Volcanoes
Shield Volcanoes
Cinder Cones
Diatremes
Maars
Features of Basaltic Lava Flows
Pahoehoe
Aa
Pillow Lava
Columnar Jointing
Lava Rise
Lava Tubes
Tree Casts
Spatter Cones
Flood Basalts
Hazards associated with Basaltic Eruptions
Lava flows
Gaseous escape
Climate change
Andesitic Eruptions
Andesitic Volcanoes
Stratovolcanoes
Calderas
Lava domes
Hazards Associated With Andesitic Eruptions
Pyroclastic Flows / Nue Ardentes (Glowing Ash Clouds)
Lahars
Tsunamis
Rhyolitic Eruptions
Summary of Some Key Ideas About Volcanoes
Important factors in Understanding Volcano Behavior
What controls Viscosity?
Patterns of Volcanism
Mitigation/Prediction?
Some Benefits of Volcanoes


===== igneous_01.html =====


GeoI Lecture Notes: Igneous Rocks
Geo I
Igneous Rocks
Fire and Ice
 Igneous rocks are by far the most abundant of the major rock types.  The other two
(sedimentary and metamorphic) are found only near the surface.  Dig deep enough and you will
eventually hit an igneous rock.
Igneous rocks form by solidifying from a melt.  Thus, to understand them we have to 
understand what makes rocks melt, what the properties of melted rock are, and what happens
when the melt solidifies.
A lot of cooling takes place deep below the surface, but a significant fraction happens at
the surface. Sometimes their appearance is accompanied by one of the great hazards of  nature,
volcanic eruptions.  We will see that an understanding of the properties of melted rock will
help us to figure out why some volcanoes erupt violently and others rather gently.
Even if they cool underground, the implacement of igneous rocks can have profound effects
on the landscape, and we will discuss what those are.
Finaly, we will discuss all the important types of igneous rocks, what
their distinguishing characteristics are, and how to identify them in the field.
Let's start with what a general discussion of MAGMA, defined as molton rock
under the ground, which is the ultimate source for igneous rock...


===== igneous_02.html =====


GeoI Lecture Notes: Igneous Rocks
Magmas
Igneous rocks are rocks that have solidified from a molten source, called magma. 
The term "magma" refers to molten rock, together with any suspended mineral grains
and dissolved gases. 
When molten rock erupts at the Earth's surface and flows from a volcano, it is called lava.
What Causes Rocks to Melt?
Well, heat (temperature) obviously, but other factors like pressure and water content play a major role.
Heat
Temperatures in the Earth increase with depth, at a rate called the
geothermal gradient. Temperatures rise rapidly from the surface (at about 30oC/km) and
reach around 1000C at a depth of just over 100 km. The
geothermal gradient is lower, about 1.5-2oC/km, beyond 100 km and temperatures don't reach
1500 until around 500 km depth.
The important sources of heat are:
heat left over from the accretion of the planet more than 4.5 billion years ago and still emanating from the Earth's core 
heat released by the continuous decay of radioactive minerals 
frictional heat generated by fault planes and the movement of plates over the asthenosphere.
Magmas rising from greater depths are a form of extra heat and can
produce melting in the rocks that they intrude. Such a situation may
occur at subduction zones, where magma generated in the mantle rises to
the base of the crust and penetrates into the crust.
Pressure
Pressure increases with depth in a fairly predictable way (lithostatic)
due to the rocks piled on top. The rate depends on the density profile of the
Earth; near the surface it is about 30 kbars/100 km.
For dry melts, the temperature required to commence melting becomes higher as pressure increases. High pressure holds the atoms closer together and it takes greater heat
energy in order to vibrate, weaken and break their bonds. It is for this reason that the mantle is still solid, rather than liquid.
The region where mantle temperatures and
pressures get closest to the melting point of mantle rocks is the asthenosphere.
If the pressure is reduced, therefore, a rock may start to melt even if its temperature remains the same. Such a situation occurs at divergent margins, where pressure is
reduced as the overlying crust is stretched and thinned. Mantle plumes may also undergo melting as they rise towards the surface. This is known as decompressional
melting.
Water
If water is present, even in small amounts, the temperature at which a rock will melt will be considerably lowered. The dipole nature of the water molecule weakens the
minerals bonds, allowing lower temperatures to vibrate and break the bonds. 
Consequently, hydrous minerals, that is, those that contain (OH) in their structure, melt at
lower temperatures. 
Furthermore, whereas dry rocks require greater temperatures to melt with an increase in pressure, wet rocks initially become less resistant to melting at
higher pressures. This is because high pressure increases the bond-breaking ability of water. An increase in pressure will also allow a greater amount of water to be
dissolved in the melt, decreasing the temperature at which the onset of melting occurs.
At subduction zones, the dehydration of the subducting plate allows water to ascend into the overlying mantle and producing melting.
COMPOSITION
Most igneous rocks are made of combinations of only 6
different minerals, with 9 different elements.
These guys are:
Olivine, Pyroxene, Amphibole, Mica (1 and 2D SiO2 polymers)
Quartz, Feldspar (3D SiO2 polymers)
The elements are:
O, Si, Al, Ca, Na, K, Fe, Mg, H
As we mentioned before, SiO2 is the most important compound,
and is what controls the properties of the magma.
Rocks that contain
       less than 45% SiO2 are termed ultrabasic 
       between 45% and 52% SiO2 are termed basic 
       between 52% and 66% SiO2 are termed intermediate 
       more than 66% SiO2 are termed acidic. 
As the minerals that are formed depends on the chemical composition of the magma, a related terminology is based on the minerals present. The above categories are thus
also known as
       ultramafic (mafic derives from Magnesium and Iron (Fe)) 
       mafic 
       intermediate 
       felsic (felsic derives from Feldspar and Silica) 
Three distinct magma types are most common: basaltic, andesitic, and rhyolitic. Volcanic rocks formed from these three magmas are called basalt, andesite and rhyolite, and
are examples of basic, intermediate and acidic rock types respectively.
As a first approximation, these three magmas have the following characteristics:
VISCOSITY
The VISCOSITY of the magma (that
is, how easily it flows) is goverened by the silica content, the presence of cations, temperature, and the amount of volitiles present.
Silica Content
Like minerals, the structure of magma is dominated by SiO4 tetrahedra groups that polymerise by sharing oxygens. Unlike minerals,
the polymers in magmas are irregular groupings of chains, sheets and networks. 
The higher the silica content, the larger the polymerised groups and
the more viscous the magma. 
Cations
The Si-O-Si bonds have strong, rigid
geometry, but if there are substantial numbers of "network modifier"
cations bridging the SiO4 groups, i.e. Si-O-cation-O-Si, the
bonds are more flexible and the viscosity decreases. 
Basic lavas have a
greater percentage of network modifier cations, such as Mg, Fe, Ca and
Mn, and so are less viscous.
Basic and ultrabasic lavas are the most fluid, with flow rates measured in metres per hour or metres per day. In exceptional cases, such as on steep slopes, lava flowing at up
to 16 km/h have been recorded. Acidic lavas can be tens of thousands of times more viscous than basic lavas.
Temperature
Viscosity increases as magma cools, therefore lavas tend to slow their advance further from the volcano. 
Volatiles
A small amount of volatiles, particularly H2O, in solution will lead to a significant decline in viscosity. 
As a result of all these factors, flows with similar compositions can have quite different
surface appearances. We will discuss these in detail later on.
The ability to flow also affects the ability of the magma to release
gasses. The greater the viscosity, the harder it is for gas to escape.
Thus, violent eruptions generally are more likely with high silica magmas.
Partial Melting
Rocks do not melt at a specific temperature. This is because rocks are not homogeneous, but are comprised of an aggregate of different minerals. 
The minerals with the
lowest melting point starts to melt first. For example, in a rock comprised of plagioclase + pyroxene + olivine, the pyroxene and the Na-rich (albite) component of the
plagioclase will melt first, leaving an unmelted mixture of olivine and Ca-rich (anorthite) plagioclase. 
If the melt fraction is separated from the unmelted residue, the
resulting magma and the solid residue will be of different compositions and different from that of the original source rock. This process of forming a magma of different
composition to the original rock is called magmatic differentiation by partial melting. 
Relative Abundance of Igneous Rock Types
The density of the of the crust is around 2.7 gm/cm3 for continental crust and 3.0 gm/cm3 for oceanic crust, increasing slightly with depth due to pressure increase. 
The
density of all rocks is somewhat higher for all rocks than for the melts that they produce. This leads to a natural buoyancy and a tendency for melts to rise to the surface.
The rising magma follows natural weaknesses and may reach the surface where it erupts as volcanic extrusions. Other magmas solidify many kilometres beneath the
surface, forming large plutonic intrusions.
Erosion may later exposes these plutonic intrusions at the surface. Whether a magma solidifies under the surface or erupts and
solidifies on the surface is controlled to a major extent by its chemical composition.
The graph below shows the relative abundances of rocks of various compositions that solidify under plutonic or volcanic conditions.
It can be seen that the great majority of plutonic rocks are of acid composition, whereas volcanic rocks tend to be of a basic composition. The reason for this is twofold.
Acid magmas are highly viscous, making it difficult for them to rise quickly through fracture systems to erupt at the surface. In contrast, basic magma is relatively
fluid and can rise through a fracture or conduit system without losing much heat and so can erupt onto the surface.
The liquidus and solidus characteristics for the two compositions are different. The liquidus is the temperature at which crystals start to form in a melt. The
solidus is the temperature at which the melt has completely solidified. These temperatures are dependent on pressure.
At "typical" H2O contents, the difference between the liquidus and solidus for an acid magma is relatively small and the magma will intersect the solidus as it rises towards
the surface (see diagram below). That is, as the magma is rising slowly (because of its viscosity) and cooling, it encounters solidification temperatures and completely
crystallises while still below the surface. The crystallisation path of drier melts will be to the right of the path shown. The liquidus curve is for water-saturated melt. The
best conditions for the eruption of acid magma is as explosive eruptions from shallow magma, or from very dry melts.
For basaltic melts, there is a temperature difference of some 200oC between the liquidus and the solidus. Therefore, although the liquidus is intersected below the surface,
and crystals start to grow, the solidus is generally not intersected and the magma is erupted as liquid plus crystals (see diagram below).


===== igneous_03a.html =====


GeoI Lecture Notes: Igneous Rocks
What Happens When the Magma Cools?
Just as rocks melt over a range of temperatures, so too do minerals
crystallise at different temperatures. Solidification of a magma is the
opposite of partial melting. 
If the melt fraction and the crystal
fraction of a magma become separated, both the melt and the solid
fraction will have different compositions from each other and from the
that of the original magma. 
The crystal and melt fractions can become
separated by pressure forcing the melt fraction out along grain
boundaries, leaving the crystal residue, or by crystals settling out of
the melt by gravity. This separation into rocks of different
composition is called magmatic differentiation by fractional
crystallisation.


===== igneous_03b.html =====


GeoI Lecture Notes: Igneous Rocks
Bowen's Reaction Series
Back in the early 1900's, N. L. Bowen and others at the Geophysical
Laboratories in Washington D.C. began experimental studies into the
order of crystallization of the common silicate minerals from a magma.
Norman Bowen
The idealized progression which they determined is still accepted as
the general model for the evolution of magmas during the cooling
process. As with everything else in geology, there are exceptions to
this rule, but for the most part it works.
Discontinuous Reaction Series
As a basaltic melt cools, the earliest common mineral to form is
olivine. As olivine contains about 40 wt % SiO2, and basaltic magma
contains around 50 wt % SiO2, as olivine crystallises, the remaining
melt becomes more silica rich. Eventually, the amount of silica in the
melt builds up until it reacts with the olivine and produces pyroxene.
Chemically,
        (Mg,Fe)2SiO4  +  SiO2    =>   2[(Mg,Fe)SiO3]
           olivine    +  quartz  =>   pyroxene
In turn, the pyroxene may later react to form amphibole and amphibole
may later react to form biotite. 
The final minerals to crystallise are
quartz + potassium feldspar + muscovite. This is why these minerals are
common in rocks that represent the residual melt of an almost
crystallised granitoid such as aplites and pegmatites. 
This series of
reactions, involving new mineral phases at each step, is called a
discontinuous reaction series.
With continued crystallisation, the composition of the remaining melt
becomes progressively more siliceous, from basaltic to andesitic to
rhyolitic. Theoretically, therefore, it is possible to produce
rhyolitic magma bodies by magmatic differentiation. 
Practically,
however, this is not feasible for large magma bodies, as it would take
an enormous volume of basaltic magma to produce a granitic pluton, and
the lack of rhyolites in regions of oceanic crust, where basaltic rock
types are most abundant, indicates that this is not how rhyolitic magma
is produced. 
Minor quantities of rhyolitic magma can be produced in
very thick sills, where the settling of early formed crystals
effectively removes them from the melt, leaving a progressively more
siliceous melt. This occurred in the Palisades Sill, in New Jersey,
U.S.A., a dolerite sill which contains a base layer of olivine-rich
dolerite (a coarse grained basalt), and an upper layer of quartz dolerite, with thin lenses of
quartz + alkali feldspar + pyroxene. The chilled margins of the sill
are basalt.
Continuous Reaction Series: Crystallisation of Plagioclase
As plagioclase forms a continuous solid solution between albite
(NaAlSi3O8) and anorthite (CaAl2Si2O8), the temperature of
crystallisation varies. Anorthite (Ca-rich) has the higher
crystallisation temperature, so the early formed plagioclase crystals
are Ca-rich. As Ca is used up in the melt, the crystallising
plagioclase becomes progressively more Na-rich. The last plagioclase
crystals to form will be the most sodic. As there is a change in
composition, but not in the crystal structure, this is a continuous
reaction series.
Plagioclase Zoning
The speed at which the plagioclase changes composition is controlled by
the rate of diffusion of the four ions (Na+, Ca2+, Al3+ and Si4+).
These diffusion rates are very slow, and chemical equilibrium is rarely
achieved. A typical plagioclase crystal will therefore have an
anorthite rich core and an albite rich outer zone.
Even for this zonation to occur, however, the atoms must be supplied to
the crystal face. But growth of the crystal depletes the melt adjacent
to the crystal of these elements.  Continued growth depends on
diffusion of atoms through this depleted zone from the "fresh" melt
further away. 
Eventually, the crystal switches from crystallising a
Ca-rich plagioclase to a Na-rich plagioclase until the Na-rich zone is
used up and the zone surrounding the crystal becomes progressively more
Ca-rich. 
The crystal then switches back to crystallising a Ca-rich
plagioclase, and the process continues, leading to alternating layers
of Ca-rich and Na-rich bands. 
Overall, however, there will be a gradual
change from a more calcic core to a more sodic outer region.


===== igneous_03c.html =====


GeoI Lecture Notes: Igneous Rocks
Varieties of Magma
There is a wide and continuous range in the composition of magmas. This
variety is due to the nature of the rocks that the magma was produced
from and the processes involved in its production. Variability in
magmas can be caused by the following factors:
Source Rocks
Because magmas are formed from pre-existing rocks, the composition of
the magma will obviously vary with the composition of the parent rock.
A magma derived from the mantle, rich in magnesium and iron (mafic
composition) will be very different from a magma derived from the
continental crust, rich in silica and aluminium. 
Similarly, granites
derived from sedimentary rocks are distinctly different from those
derived from igneous rocks.
Partial Melting
As previously noted, rocks at a specific pressure do not melt at a
given temperature, but over a range of temperatures spanning several
hundred degrees. 
Rocks are aggregates of minerals, each of which has a
different melting point. Relatively low temperatures will result in
small degrees of partial melting. 
Such magmas will be enriched in
components that melt at low temperatures, and depleted in the elements
that remain in the solid residual rock. 
Thus although magmas reflect
the composition of the source rock to some degree, they are different
from their source rocks. 
It is rare for a rock to be completely melted
before the magma separates from residue.
Fractional Crystallisation
As noted above, crystallisation also occurs over a range of
temperatures. The crystallisation of early, high temperature minerals
makes the residual melt richer in SiO2.  Early formed crystals may be
separated from the residual melt by processes such as
settling of early formed crystals to the bottom of a magma chamber 
growth of crystals on the walls of a magma chamber 
filtering out of large, early formed crystals as the melt migrates
through narrow fractures.
Magma Mixing
Where two different magmas are formed, one magma may intrude into and
mix with the other, Where the mixing is complete, a magma of
intermediate composition between the two original magmas may be
produced. 
Frequently, however, the mixing is incomplete and blocks of
rock of one composition can be seen mixed in with rocks of the other.
Assimilation
As magmas migrate through the crust, blocks of rocks from the roof and
walls of the magma chamber may break off and become incorporated into
the magma. 
The blocks may be partially or completely assimilated into the
magma, thus changing the magma's composition.


===== igneous_03d.html =====


GeoI Lecture Notes: Igneous Rocks
Igneous Textures
The texture of a rock refers to the size, shape and arrangement of the
mineral grains in the rock that give the rock its overall appearance.
The most important, but not only, factor that controls the grain size
of a rock is its cooling history.
Grain Size
Grain size tells us much about the crystallisation of an igneous rock. It is also the most noticeable feature and thus provides our first criterion for classification.
Effect of Cooling Rate
When a large magma body remains underground, it is insulated from heat loss and cools and solidifies very slowly. 
Crystals that grow for thousands of years have ample
time to grow large enough to be easily seen. 
In contrast, a rock that is erupted onto the Earth's surface will cool swiftly, leading to a fine-grained or glassy rock.
Classifications
Plutonic/Intrusive rocks are large bodies that solidify deep within the earth and are medium to coarse grained (> 1 mm).
Volcanic/Extrusive  rocks solidify at the earth's surface and are glassy to fine grained (
Hypabyssal rocks solidify within the earth, but at shallow depths or as small or thin bodies (~ 1 mm).
Crystallisation of a magma is largely the result of decreasing
temperature as heat is lost to the surroundings. 
If a magma is exposed
to the atmosphere, as happens during volcanic eruptions, cooling and
crystallisation is rapid. During rapid cooling, many nuclei are formed
in a short time and many crystals begin to grow so that many small
crystals rather than fewer large ones are formed. The resulting rock is
fine-grained. 
If cooling is very rapid, crystals may not form at all
and glass results. 
Where a magma remains at depth within the earth,
heat loss is relatively slow. Crystal nucleation and growth is slower
so that large crystals develop, forming a coarse-grained rock.
The average diameter of the constituent mineral grains determines whether a rock is -
coarse-grained: > 5 mm average diameter 
medium-grained: 1-5 mm average diameter 
fine-grained: very fine grained glassy no crystals formed 
For fine grained rocks, a further distinction may be given.
Phaneritic: applies to grain size comfortably evident to the unaided eye. 
Aphanitic: indicates the mineral grains (unless the rock is glass) can only be seen with the use of a lens or microscope. 
Plutonic rocks are obviously phaneritic. Glassy rocks must be volcanic.
Degree of Crystallinity
There are three divisions.
Holocrystalline - composed wholly of crystals 
Hemicrystalline - composed partly of crystals and partly of glass 
Holohyaline - composed wholly of glass. 
Effect of Volatiles
Water, and other volatiles, as well as many rare elements such as
lithium, beryllium, boron and some heavy metals, are not readily
incorporated into the common, early formed minerals that crystallise
from the magma. The late, residual melt will therefore be rich in these
materials. 
An increase in the amount of water and other volatiles
affects many properties of the melt which, in turn, affect crystal
growth. 
Viscosity is reduced with an increase in water content, which
counteracts the effects of increasing silica content and lowering
temperature of the residual magma. 
Density is lowered, as is the
solidus temperature (the temperature that the entire magma solidifies)
and nucleation rates, whereas rates of chemical diffusion are raised.
These factors allow the residual melt to penetrate into the earlier
formed rock. From this water-rich residual melt or out of an exolved
aqueous phase, large crystals may form. These are called pegmatites. 
Pegmatites often are economically viable sources of minerals like micas
and various gemstones.  Below is the Hamlin necklace in the Harvard
collection. The gem tourmalines are from the famous Hamlin 1820 find on
Mount Mica, Maine, which started America's Gem Industry.
If
water is lost from theses late stage magmas, crystal growth is slower
as nucleation rates increase and chemical diffusion is lower, and a
sugary-grained rock develops, known as an aplite.
Left: Specimens of aplite; Right: Dike of Aplite in Granite
Grain Size Variations
Other factors apart from depth may also influence grain size. 
The slow cooling process at depth may be interrupted before all the magma is used up and the magma,
containing scattered large crystals, may move rapidly towards the surface where it is chilled. 
The remaining melt gives rise to a groundmass or matrix of finer-grained
interlocking crystals, or even glass, containing the larger crystals, or phenocrysts. 
Igneous rock that contains minerals of two distinct sizes are said to be porphyritic.
DIORITE PORPHYRY
Volcanic rocks of this type are sometimes known as porphyries, with the phenocrysts used as a modifier (e.g. quartz porphyry).
Below are porphyritic dacites (a & b), pumice (c) and andesite (d) from the Mt Lassen, CA eruption of 1915:
 
When determining whether a rock is plutonic, hypabyssal or volcanic, it is the size of the groundmass that is critical, as the groundmass shows the environment of the final
crystallisation.
A rock may be -
Equigranular: -constituent mineral grains roughly uniform in size 
Porphyritic: -containing relatively large crystals (phenocrysts) in a finer-grained matrix (groundmass). 
Seriate: -constituent mineral grains show a gradation in grain size from the groundmass to the phenocrysts,
	(i.e. size distribution is not bi-modal despite large
       contrast in grainsize from smallest to largest grains). 
Grain Shape
Three terms are used to describe grain shapes, based on the degree of crystal face development.
Euhedral - grain displaying fully developed crystal form 
Subhedral - grain showing some trace of a crystal form. 
Anhedral - grain showing no development of crystal form whatsoever. 
Euhedral grains develop where the mineral is unimpeded by the growth of
neighbouring crystals. 
Thus, euhedral grains are best developed by
early formed crystals, or by crystals that grow into free space such as
an open fracture or into vughs, or cavities, in the rock.


===== igneous_03e.html =====


GeoI Lecture Notes: Igneous Rocks
Summary of Igneous Structures
Some characteristic igneous structures include:
interlocking grains
a characteristic of all igneous rocks, but most easily seen in the coarse-grained rocks e.g. granites. 
massive
uniform in appearance 
phenocrysts
large crystals in a matrix of smaller crystals. A rock with abundant phenocrysts is said to be "porphyritic". Such a rock is often simply called a porphyry, with a
modifying name of the major phenocryst(s), e.g a quartz-feldspar porphyry. 
xenoliths
fragments of rock accidentally included into the igneous rock. If these fragments are crystals, the term applied is "xenocrysts". Xenocrysts are very much less
common than phenocrysts and there must be some evidence of the foreign nature of the crystal before it is termed a xenocryst. 
Xenoliths: Inclusions in Granite, Donner Summit, CA.
vesicles
spherical to oval gas cavities in volcanic rocks. Extremely vesicular rocks of basaltic composition are called "scoria". The acid, or rhyolitic, equivalents are called
"pumice". 
SCORIA
PUMICE
amygdules (amygdales)
vesicles filled with secondary minerals.  Below is Thomsonite, a complex hydrous alumino-silicate of calcium and sodium that occurs as amygdules in the basaltic lava flows about 5 miles southwest of Grand Marais, Minnesota.
miarolytic cavities
irregularly shaped gas cavities formed in the melt of plutonic rocks due to decreased pressure as the melt rises. Euhedral crystals grow into the cavity. Rare minerals are sometimes found in these cavities as trace elements get concentrated in the late fractions of the melt.  An example is shown below from the Crystal Peak Mining District of Colorado.
zoned crystals
normally only visible under the microscope. The zoning reflects changes in the composition of the melt during crystallisation. 
Zoned Feldspar
flow structure
alignment of elongate or platy crystals, xenoliths, vesicles, or amygdales due to flow of the molten rock. Some lavas have flow structure as fine layers. 
volcanic glass
gives a glassy appearance to the rock and a conchoidal fracture. A glassy acidic rock is termed obsidian. The basaltic equivalent is called tachylite, but is very
much rarer. 
aplite
light coloured, relatively fine grained. They are formed from residual magmas low in volatiles, promoting the characteristic sugary texture. Aplite dykes are quite
common in granitic rocks. 
pegmatite
very large interlocking crystals, usually exceeding 1 cm in diameter. Pegmatite dykes are formed from residual magmas rich in volatiles. 
graphic granite
an intergrowth of quartz and alkali feldspar resulting from the simultaneous crystallisation of the two minerals, usually from a eutectic mixture (the minerals are in
equilibrium and co-exist stably). 
Image of a 1" (25 mm) core of graphic granite. Light areas are potassium feldspar, and darker areas are quartz. Although these minerals have nearly identical densities,
divergence in their x-ray attenuation behavior caused by their different atomic constituents allows them to be easily distinguished on a sub-millimeter scale.
Optimizing the scanning and reconstruction conditions to bring out the division between these two phases causes micas and oxides to appear as pure white. (Sample
provided by Dr. Robert Reed, University of Texas at Austin).


===== igneous_04a.html =====


GeoI Lecture Notes: Igneous Rocks
The Classification of Igneous Rocks
Igneous rocks have a two-fold classification scheme, based on the
mineralogy of the rock and its paragenesis, i.e. how the rock
formed.
In many introductory texts, igneous rocks are divided into 6 major groups -
3 intrusive (granite, diorite, and gabbro) and 3 extrusive (rhyolite, andesite,
and basalt) - based on the following scheme:
The important variable in the above chart is mineral composition.  Note the similarity
in the progression of minerals to Bowen's reaction series.   Note also that to
first order, a rhyolite is a rapidly cooled granite, and a gabbro is a slowly cooled
basalt.
The problem is that this chart barely scratches the surface of the types of
igneous rocks that geologists need to be familiar with.  Thus, a more complete
discussion appears here.


===== igneous_04b.html =====


GeoI Lecture Notes: Igneous Rocks
A More Complete Overview of Classification
Minerals found in igneous rocks are divided into 5 groups for
classification purposes:
Q - quartz
   
   P - plagioclase
A - alkali (K) feldspars
F - feldspathoids (feldspars deficient in silica)
M - mafic and other minerals
It is vital to understand the origin of an igneous rock, so the
mineralogy is only taken into account after first determining under
what conditions the rock was formed. That is, it is necessary to
determine whether the rock is
plutonic - coarse grained, deep seated, major
   intrusions
volcanic - fine grained, extrusive lava
   flows
hypabyssal - medium to fine grained, shallow,
   minor intrusions
pyroclastic - volcanic rocks formed from
   air-fall deposits
This is done by looking at the grain size and texture of the rock.
Note that the conditions under which the rock finally solidified is
determined by the grain size of the groundmass,
rather than the size of any earlier formed phenocrysts.


===== igneous_04c.html =====


GeoI Lecture Notes: Igneous Rocks
Plutonic Rocks
As plutonic rocks form deep under the earth's surface in large
magma chambers, it cools slowly and, initially, relatively few
nucleation centres form, so the crystals are free to grow, unhindered
by the growth of neighbouring crystals. 
The key aspect for the
recognition of plutonic rocks, therefore, is a coarse (>5 mm) to
medium (1 mm to 5 mm) grain size.
Plutonic rocks that have less than 90% mafic minerals, and no
feldspathoids (the vast bulk of all plutonic rocks) are classified
according to the relative percentages of quartz, alkali feldspar and
plagioclase. 
Acid Plutonic Rocks
The most abundant plutonic rock is the rock commonly called
granite. 
Granites are predominantly composed of feldspar and
quartz, with quartz comprising 20% or more of the total amount of
feldspar + quartz. 
These felsic rocks are subdivided according
to the ratio of alkali feldspar to plagioclase. 
Granites are formed
from relatively water-rich magmas, so contain minor amounts of
hydrous minerals such as biotite and hornblende.
Granites with only, or predominantly, alkali feldspar to the relative
or complete exclusion of plagioclase are called alkali feldspar
granite. The higher percentage of K in these granites results in
the mica being muscovite as well as, or instead of, biotite.
Where the proportion of alkali feldspar to plagioclase is between 2:1
and 9:1, the rock is a syenogranite. 
Where the proportions of
alkali feldspar and plagioclase are relatively even (neither one
being more than twice the amount of the other) it is a
monzogranite. 
Where the proportion of alkali feldspar to
plagioclase is between 1:2 and 1:9, the rock is a
granodiorite. 
A granitic rock comprised of quartz and
plagioclase, to the virtual exclusion of alkali feldspar, is known as
a tonalite. 
Tonalite
The plagioclase in granitic rocks is higher in Na
than Ca, and is of albite to oligoclase composition.
Acidic rocks, with a relative abundance of greater than 20%
quartz, shown in yellow on the diagram below, are the most abundant
of plutonic rocks.
Note that the mineral percentages need to be recalculated to 100%
and are not simply the modal percentages contained in the rock. For
example, a rock with 20% quartz, 25% alkali feldspar and 35%
plagioclase (with 20% mafic minerals), would be recalculated so
that
Q = 20 / (20+25+35) % = 25%,
   
   A = 25 / (20+25+35) % = 31.25%
P = 35 / (20+25+35) % = 43.75%
and would plot in the Granodiorite field.
Intermediate and mafic rocks with high plagioclase content are
subdivided according to the composition of the plagioclase. "An"
refers to the anorthite content of the plagioclase. A plagioclase
consisting of a mixture of 60% anorthite and 40% albite is therefore
An60. A rock consisting of over 90% plagioclase (therefore less than
10% mafic minerals) is an "Anorthosite". Anorthorsite is very common in the
Adirondacks and in the lunar highlands.
ANORTHOSITE
Where the feldspar is predominantly alkali feldspar rather than
plagioclase, the rock is a syenite. Syenite is generally less
mafic than diorite. 
SYENITE
Where there are approximately equal proportions
of alkali feldspar and plagioclase, the rock is called a
monzonite.
MONZONITE
(Note: As a help for remembering, from alkali feldspar
dominant to plagioclase dominant, the rocks are syenite,
monzonite and diorite. Note the similarity to the acid
plutonic rock, syenogranite, monzogranite and
granodiorite.)
Intermediate Plutonic Rocks
The most common intermediate plutonic rock is diorite. This
is similar to granite, but is dominated by plagioclase, with quartz
only a minor constituent. Hornblende and/or pyroxene
(both dark coloured minerals) are major constituents, giving the rock
a mottled black and white appearance. The plagioclase is of
andesine composition, having slightly greater percentage of Na
than Ca.
Basic Plutonic Rocks
A magma with the same composition as basalt, but crystallising
under plutonic conditions, forms gabbro. Gabbros are composed
of plagioclase and pyroxene, with lesser
olivine. These are all anhydrous minerals and reflect dry
melting conditions in the source region. The plagioclase is
Ca-rich.
Ultrabasic Plutonic Rocks
Plutonic rocks with over 90% mafic minerals (M>90) are
classified according to their mafic minerals and are not plotted on
the above diagram. The following rocks represents the main categories
of ultramafic rocks.
dunite - over 90% olivine with minor
   pyroxene
peridotite - olivine and pyroxene, with over
   40% olivine
Peridotite: the distinctive green color is due to its being composed almost entirely of olivine.
Black flecks within the samples shown above are pyroxene grains.
pyroxenite - < 40% olivine and pyroxene
   > hornblende
hornblendite - < 40% olivine and
   hornblende > pyroxene
If any of the above rocks become hydrated and essentially turned
into serpentine, the resulting rock is termed a
serpentinite.
Serpentinite is California's state rock. This 1-1/2 meter boulder sits in a place of honor in the roof garden of the Oakland Museum of California, its polished surface gleaming blue and jade-green.


===== igneous_04d.html =====


GeoI Lecture Notes: Igneous Rocks
Hypabyssal Rocks (Minor Intrusives)
Hypabyssal rocks form in minor intrusive bodies such as dykes,
sills and volcanic plugs. They have a groundmass grain size in the
fine to medium range. Hypabyssal rocks can be broadly subdivided into
equigranular rocks and porphyritic rocks.
If the rock is equigranular, it is given the same name as its
plutonic equivalent, with the prefix "micro" added. A dyke with a
composition the same as a monzonite, but with a finer (around 1 mm)
grain size, is termed a micromonzonite. The exception is a
dolerite which is the hypabyssal equivalent of a
gabbro (plutonic) or a basalt (volcanic).
Inclined Dolerite Sheet cutting across strata in South Africa
A porphyritic hypabyssal rock is generally called
porphyry , with a modifier added that indicates
either the rock composition, or the types of phenocrysts present.
Thus a porphyry with a rhyolitic groundmass and quartz and feldspar
phenocrysts may be termed a granite porphyry, or a quartz - feldspar
porphyry. Alternatively, it may be termed a porphyritic rhyolite.


===== igneous_04e.html =====


GeoI Lecture Notes: Igneous Rocks
Volcanic Rocks
Volcanic rocks are formed from magma that has erupted onto the
earth's surface. Consequently, they cool quickly and many nucleation
centres form, resulting in a fine grained rock. If the grains are
large enough to be seen with the naked eye, the rock is said to have
a phaneritic texture, otherwise, it is said to be
aphanitic .
The fine grain size means that definite classifications of hand
specimens is generally not possible, so a working, or field name is
generally applied until further work can be done. The acidic rocks
tend to be lighter coloured than basic rocks, although the colour
commonly becomes darker with finer grain size. Acidic glass, called
obsidian, for example, is black. On this basis,
light coloured volcanic rocks are generally called rhyolite
and dark coloured volcanic rocks are generally assumed to be
basalt.
Generally, a good indication of the overall mineralogy of the rock
can be obtained by identifying the phenocrysts. Acidic rocks may have
quartz phenocrysts, along with feldspars. Phenocrysts of the hydrous
minerals such as biotite and hornblende also suggest an acidic
composition. Phenocrysts of olivine is diagnostic of a basic
composition. Pyroxene is also indicative of a basic composition.
Acid Volcanic Rocks
Acid volcanic rocks are the same composition as granites, and so
have the same mineralogy. They commonly have phenocrysts of quartz
and feldspar,with minor hornblende and mica, but there are usually
not sufficient phenocrysts for the rock to be termed porphyritic. The
abundance of quartz and feldspar, both as phenocrysts and in the
groundmass, gives the rock a light colour. Where the feldspars are
dominantly alkali feldspars, the rock is a rhyolite and often
has a reddish to pinkish colour. 
RHYOLITE
Where the feldspars are dominantly
plagioclase, it is a dacite.
DACITE
Intermediate Volcanic Rocks
Volcanic rock with an intermediate composition is andesite.
They are generally intermediate in colour between rhyolite and
basalt, but can resemble basalt, being a medium to dark grey. They
may contain hornblende, along with plagioclase and pyroxene
and may also contain minor quartz. They are named after the Andes
mountains, where they are common. 
ANDESITE
Basic Volcanic Rocks
The most abundant volcanic rock is basalt. It is dark grey
to black, but weathers to a lighter grey. It is composed of
plagioclase and pyroxene with lesser olivine. Olivine is the most
commonly seen phenocryst, being a high temperature, early
crystallising mineral, but light, rectangular plagioclase and black
pyroxene may also be seen in phaneritic samples.
BASALT
The large majority of volcanic rocks are in the andesite / basalt
field. The distinction between these two is on the wt% of
SiO2 with basalt (the most common volcanic rock) having
less than 52% SiO2. As this criteria can not be used for
classifying hand specimens, the percentage of mafic minerals may be
used, with basalt having greater than 35% mafic minerals by volume.
This distinction is also rather unsatisfactory in most cases, due to
the fine grain size of samples, so a tentative field name of basalt
is generally applied in most cases, with andesite being suggested if
the rock shows characteristics such as a lighter overall colour, a
greenish colour or if it is known to be associated with other, higher
silica rocks.
Ultrabasic Volcanic Rocks
These are very rare, ancient rocks known as komatiite that
do not erupt today. They consist of long phenocrysts of olivine, with
fine pyroxene and rare plagioclase. Komatiites are evidence of a
period of Earth's history when temperatures in the upper mantle were
hot enough to produce melting of the upper mantle to a degree
sufficient to produce ultramafic magma.
Barberton olivine spinifex komatiite. Top of photo is within 10 cm of chill margin. Bladed olivine spinifex crystals show up as dark shadows revealed by differential
weathering of the serpentine that replaced olivine. The maximum length of the olivine blades is 200 mm. Resistant weathering material is pyroxene and spinel
that crystallized later and filled in between the olivine blades. Thermobarometry of this pyroxene indicated emplacement conditions of less than 1400 degrees C,
200 MPa and dissolved magmatic H2O contents of 4-6 wt %. Camera cap in photo is 55 mm in diameter. 
Volcanic rocks that have less than 90% mafic minerals, and no
feldspathoids (the great majority of all volcanic rocks) are
classified according to the relative percentages of quartz, alkali
feldspar and plagioclase, as shown below.
Note that the mineral percentages need to be recalculated to 100%
and are not simply the modal percentages contained in the rock.


===== igneous_04f.html =====


GeoI Lecture Notes: Igneous Rocks
Pyroclastic Rocks
These consist of fragmental volcanic rocks that have been
explosively ejected from a vent. The fragments can consist either of
glass (vitric fragments), crystals, or rock (lithic) fragments.
Unconsolidated deposits are known as "tephra". Large fragments
(> 64 mm) are called blocks if they are angular,
or bombs if they are rounded. Blocks are chunks of
solid rock that were blasted out during the eruption, whereas bombs
are large blobs of magma that solidify in flight. Bombs frequently
show tapering that developed as they cooled and solidified in
flight.
Volcanic Block
Volcanic Bomb
Naming pyroclastics is based on the fragment size. However,
whereas the grain size of other igneous rocks is based on that of the
finer groundmass, for pyroclastic rocks the classification is based
on the larger fragments. It is these fragments that give some
indication as to the power of the eruption, whereas the finer
fragments are nearly ubiquitous.
Pyroclastic rocks are classified according to
Fragment Size
< 1/16 mm Fine tuff
1/16 - 2 mm Coarse tuff
2 -64 mm Lapilli tuff
> 64 mm Agglomerate (rounded fragments)
> 64 mm Pyroclastic breccia (angular fragments)
Volcanic Breccia
Fragment Type
Note the presence of glass, crystals, rock fragments, pumice,
   ash, etc. What are their relative percentages?
   
   A tuff with predominantly rock fragments is known as a
   lithic tuff.
   A tuff with predominantly pumice and glass fragments is
   known as a vitric tuff.
   A tuff with predominantly crystal fragments is known as a
   crystal tuff.
Volcanic Tuff at Katmai, Alaska
Composition
Rhyolitic, andesitic, basaltic, etc.
Ignimbrites
Some pyroclastic material produce flows known as
   nue ardentes, or "glowing ash clouds". These
   particularly dangerous and destructive flows travel at high speed
   and at temperatures of around 600C. When the particles come
   to rest, they may be hot enough to weld together to form a hard
   rock, known as a welded tuff, or ignimbrite.
   Ignimbrites can often be distinguished by having shards of
   flattened glass incorporated into them, formed when the hot,
   ductile material solidified to rock. Ignimbrites are produced by
   andesitic to rhyolitic eruptions.
This picture illustrates the texture of a typical large volume
ignimbrite. It consists of fist-sized dacitic pumice clasts and small
sparse lithics in a crumbly, finer grained matrix. Such rocks are very
rapidly eroded, and are thus not well preserved or exposed in temperate
regions. This example is from the 4.6 million year old Real Grande
ignimbrite which has a volume of the order of 500 cubic kilometers.
The ignimbrite erupted during the formation of Crater Lake caldera
6,800 years ago shows magnificent compositional zonation. The lowermost
(pale) component exposed here is rhyodacitic in composition (70-72%
SiO2); the uppermost (dark) component is andesitic (56-62% SiO2).
Tapping of a compositionally zoned magma chamber with more evolved
dacitic magma at the top yielded zoned deposits, showing mirror-image
relationships: the first-erupted rhyodacites are at the bottom. There
are no obvious breaks in the sequence: the mechanisms of transport and
emplacement of ignimbrites that can yield these relationships remain
poorly understood. Note the splendid pillars, evidence of rapid
erosion.


===== igneous_05.html =====


GeoI Lecture Notes: Igneous Rocks
Where Does Magma Come From?
Let's consider separately the probable origins of Basaltic, Andesitic,
and Rhyolitic Magmas
The Origin of Basaltic Magma
Several lines of evidence point to the production of basaltic
magma from the upper mantle.
Basaltic volcanoes occur on both continental and oceanic
   crusts. As these two crusts are different, it implies that there
   is no crustal component involved in the formation of basaltic
   magma.
Basalt (volcanic) and gabbro (plutonic) are virtually the only
   igneous rocks in the oceanic crust. As the oceanic crust directly
   overlies the mantle, the source of the magma must be the
   ultramafic mantle.
Volcanism at mid-ocean ridges is basaltic. Mid-ocean ridges
   form where the crust is separating, allowing mantle derived magmas
   to intrude.
"Hot-spot" basaltic volcanoes, such as the Hawaiian island
   chain, suggests that the source of the volcanism is below the
   lithosphere. The mantle source of the volcanoes remains stable,
   while the overlying plate moves over the source of the
   volcanism.
Basalts are essentially comprised of plagioclase + pyroxene +
   olivine. These are all anhydrous minerals, which implies that the
   source region is deficient in water.
Basaltic magma is low in volatiles, rarely exceeding 0.2%
   water. As basaltic magma is capable of holding several percent
   water vapour before it becomes saturated, the low water content
   implies a deficiency in the source region.
Experimental work on garnet peridotites, which are thought to
   approximate the composition of the mantle at around 100 km below
   the surface, has shown that, at pressures and temperatures
   equivalent to those found in the asthenosphere (around 100 km), a
   10 - 15% partial melt will yield magma of basaltic
   composition.
All the above evidence indicates that basaltic magma is formed
from the dry partial melting of rocks in the upper mantle. The
mantle is not completely homogeneous, however, and therefore basalts
and gabbros also have some variability in their compositions. Some of
this mantle heterogeneity derives from the partial melting of the
upper mantle soon after the Earth's formation. Lighter elements, such
as sodium, potassium and aluminium rose to become the Earth's
earliest crust. The remaining upper mantle therefore became depleted
in these elements, whereas small amounts still exist below the upper
mantle. A basalt produced by the partial melting of upper mantle
rocks will therefore be slightly depleted in the light elements
relative to a basalt derived from deeper sources.
Oceanic Basalts
The most abundant volcanic rock on Earth are
Mid-Ocean Ridge Basalts (MORBs), which
cover 65% of the Earth's surface. They have low concentrations of
sodium, potassium and aluminium, indicating an upper mantle source.
They are formed at oceanic spreading centres, where mantle material
melts as it rises under the base of the thin crust. Generally, MORBs
erupt under thousands of metres of seawater.
Hot spot volcanism produces Ocean Island
Basalts (OIBs). They contain small but significant amounts of
sodium, potassium and aluminium, indicating a deep mantle source.
They are generally formed in intraplate settings, such as Hawai'i.
The production of hot spot trails also infers a source below the
lithosphere, as the lithosphere passes over the deep mantle heat
source.
Continental Basalts
There is a little more variety in continental basalts, but there
are similar relationships to oceanic basalts. Basalts associated with
continental rifting and intraplate volcanics have compositions that
indicate a deep mantle source, whereas basalts associated with
subduction zones tap an upper mantle source. All continental basalts,
however, must migrate through tens of kilometres of continental
crust, and some assimilation of the crust may occur, producing
greater variations in their compositions.
The Origin of Andesitic Magma
Andesitic volcanoes are also found on both continental and oceanic
crusts, but only in specific locations. In the Pacific region, for
example, andesitic volcanoes do not occur within the Pacific Ocean
basin, but are common just outside the basin. The line separating
these two regions is known as the Andesite Line. This line
corresponds to regions of subducting plate boundaries.
When oceanic lithosphere is subducted, the capping of basaltic
oceanic crust is saturated by water. If the lithosphere is very
young, and therefore hot, as it subducts into the asthenosphere the
wet crust may start to melt. With the angle of subduction of the
plate, you would expect the subducted crust to have reached a depth
of around 80 km when it is about 250 km from the trench marking the
start of the subduction zone. This is where andesitic volcanoes
occur.
This scenario is what is represented by some introductory earth
science textbooks, but it is a special case and not the norm. The
theory was developed due to most work being done around the large
andesitic volcanoes of the western Americas and Japan, and by
experimental work that showed that andesitic magma can be produced by
partial melting of wet oceanic crust at suitably high pressure.
Where old lithosphere is subducted in oceanic settings, however,
basaltic volcanism is the norm, showing that it is not the oceanic
crust that is melting, but the overlying mantle. Earthquake studies
also show that earthquake foci are up to 700 km below the surface in
regions of old, steeply dipping subduction zones. this indicates that
the descending slab is still cold enough to undergo brittle
deformation, so can not be melting.
In regions involving the subduction of oceanic crust under
continental crust, water is released from the subducting slab as
amphibolite breaks down to form eclogite. The water migrates to the
overlying mantle. As water reduces the melting point of the mantle,
the release of water leads to the wet partial melting of the
overlying mantle wedge. The formation of andesite arise from the
underplating (the pooling of magma at the base of the crust) and
fractional crystallisation of this basaltic magma from the
mantle wedge. The heat from the underplating magma may partially melt
the continental crust and magma mixing of the felsic melts of
the continental crust plus the mafic melts from the mantle may also
be an important component in the production of andesitic magma.
As andesitic magma is close to the composition of average
continental crust, it is possible to produce andesitic magma by the
complete melting of continental crust. Although some andesitic magma
may be produced in this way, the vast majority is produced at
subduction zones, either by the wet partial melting of the oceanic
(basaltic) crust or from the fractional crystallisation of basaltic
melts.
The Origin of Rhyolitic Magma
Rhyolitic volcanoes occur in regions of continental crust or in
regions of andesitic volcanism. They do not occur on oceanic crust.
This implies that continental crust must be involved in the formation
of rhyolitic magma.
Rhyolitic volcanoes give off a great deal of water vapour, and
plutonic rocks formed from rhyolitic magma (granitoids) contain
significant amounts of hydrous (OH-bearing) mica and amphiboles. The
OH must come from water dissolved in the melt.
Experimental work has shown that the wet partial melting of rocks
of the composition of the continental crust will result in a
rhyolitic magma.
It should be noted that most rhyolitic magmas solidify
underground. Rhyolitic magma is very viscous, and can not easily make
its way through the crust, and the temperature at which the magma
solidifies is generally reached before the magma gets to the surface.
The solidification is helped by the reduction in pressure as the
magma ascends. Because rhyolitic magma contains significant amounts
of dissolved water vapour, the reduction in pressure increases the
temperature at which it can remain a melt, but the temperature of the
magma steadily declines as it rises through the relatively cool
crustal rocks.


===== igneous_06.html =====


GeoI Lecture Notes: Igneous Rocks
Intrusive Landforms
Igneous rocks that have cooled underground are termed
"intrusive", that is, he magma did not form in
situ , but has intruded the surrounding rocks. Intrusive rocks
are therefore always younger than the rocks surrounding them.
Intrusive rocks can only be seen after erosion has removed the
overlying rocks to expose them. As intrusive rocks form underground,
they cool slowly, forming rocks of medium to coarse grain size. Rocks
formed in large intrusive structures are termed "plutonic",
those that form in small intrusions are called
"hypabyssal".
Major (Plutonic) Intrusions
Batholiths
The largest igneous intrusions are batholiths. They are defined as
being over 100 km2 in extent, but may be over 250 km wide
and over 1000 km long. Batholiths are some 20 to 30 km thick, which
is a sizeable proportion of the continental crust, but compared to
their lateral extent, they are somewhat tabular bodies. They are
typically composite, being made up of a number of distinct, but
associated intrusions. Walls of batholiths are generally near
vertical.
A major problem associated with batholiths is just how they are
emplaced - what happens to all the rock that they have intruded? The
traditional explanation has been by emplacement by
stoping . When a magma intrudes, it breaks off
fragments of the overlying rock. Being denser than the magma, these
rock fragments may sink through the magma. The fragments may sink all
the way to the floor of the magma chamber, or they may become
assimilated with the magma, thereby changing the magma composition
and volume slightly, or they may remain trapped within the magma as a
xenolith (xeno = "foreign", lith = "rock"). 
The
major problem with this emplacement method is that these highly
viscous magmas can bring up from depth high density blocks. If quite
dense rocks can be carried up with the magma, it is hard to see how
relatively low density blocks can sink through the same viscous
magma. While stoping undoubtedly occurs, and is a factor in the
emplacement of batholiths, it is not the sole answer. Similarly, the
diapir model, or large rising blob of magma, is probably overly
simplistic and overrated as an emplacement mechanism. This form of
emplacement is likely to be limited to the deepest crustal regions.
Many, if not most plutonic intrusions occur in extensional regimes,
and the "room problem" may be partially solved by this extension of
the crust. In the upper crust, plutons are likely to be fed by dykes
to ballooning plutons that push the country rock aside and
upwards.
Stocks
Stocks are similar to batholiths, but smaller, having an area of
less than 100 km2. They, too can be composite bodies. Some
stocks are just the top of a larger batholith, that only has a
relatively small part of it exposed at the surface.
A useful term used to describe a major intrusion whose extent and
relationships are uncertain, is pluton.
Laccoliths
Laccoliths intrude between parallel layers of rock at relatively
shallow depths. The low pressure allows the magma to dome up the
overlying rock, so the intrusion becomes a lenticular, mushroom
shaped body. Laccoliths are generally formed from acidic, viscous
magmas that bulge upwards rather than spreading laterally. The
thickness / diameter of laccoliths is greater than 1 / 10, otherwise
it is termed a sill.
Laccolith: Bear Butte, Sturgis, South Dakota.
Lopoliths
Lopoliths are concordant (parallel to layering) intrusions that
are saucer shaped. They are formed in a similar manner to laccoliths,
but are produced from dense, mafic magma that depresses the overlying
strata. Many lopoliths contain layered gabbroic rocks. Some are very
large with thicknesses of many kilometres. The Bushveldt lopolith in
southern Africa is several hundred kilometres across and contains the
richest platinum deposits known.
Minor (Hypabyssal) Intrusions
Dykes
Dykes are discordant tabular sheets that cut
across the layering of the rock it intrudes and are commonly steeply
inclined. In regions of crustal extension, fractures may from which
are filled by magma from a deep source, or intrusive magma may
promote fracturing and extension of the crust. Dykes in outcrop range
from a few metres in length to many kilometres, and range from a few
centimetres wide to over 100 m, although the Great Dyke of Zimbabwe
is a gabbroic mass nearly 500 km long and about 8 km wide. Because
dykes intrude relatively cool rocks, they frequently display a
chilled margin, with grain size becoming coarser towards the centre
where the rate of cooling has been slower. Dykes may occur in
swarms of parallel dykes, particularly where there
has been crustal extension. Veins are very thin
dykes.
Aplite dykes are common in granitic bodies. They
are light coloured, equigranular and fine to medium grained. They are
formed from the last residues of melt after most of the
crystallisation of the granitoid was completed, and hence are rich in
quartz and alkali feldspar and sometimes muscovite.
Pegmatite dykes also represent crystallisation
from a residual melt fraction, but pegmatites are formed from a
water-rich fluid, and are very coarse grained. Occasionally,
pegmatites contain minerals such as tourmaline, garnet, apatite,
beryl, topaz, spodumene, magnetite, sphene, and zircon, and numerous
other rare minerals. Most, however, just contain quartz, alkali
feldspar, micas and tourmaline. The occurrence of rare minerals is
due to the progressive concentration of trace elements into the last
fraction of melt, as these elements are not constituents of the
common minerals that have crystallised during the solidification of
the bulk of the magma.
Dike, with plug in background.  Shiprock, NM.
Sills
Sills are similar to dykes, but are concordant ,
that is, they intrude parallel to the layering of the country rock.
Thicknesses range from metres to hundreds of metres. Because they
form by lifting and separating adjacent rock layers, sills only form
within a few kilometres of the surface. The Palisades Sill, in New
Jersey, U.S.A., is a dolerite sill which demonstrates magmatic
differentiation by fractional crystallisation. It contains a base
layer of olivine-rich dolerite formed by crystal settling of the
early crystallising olivine, a central dolerite, which comprises the
bulk of the sill and an upper layer of quartz dolerite, with thin
lenses of quartz + alkali feldspar + pyroxene which represent late
melt fraction after the more mafic minerals have crystallised. The
chilled margins of the sill are basalt.
Sill, between nearly vertical rock layers.  Gardiner, MT.
Volcanic Necks / Plugs
Plugs represent the cylindrical feeder pipe, or conduit, of a
volcano. The magma that solidified in the conduit is harder and more
resistant to erosion than the pyroclastic deposits and lavas that
make up the flanks of the volcano. After the volcano becomes extinct,
therefore, the plug often remains standing like a spire over the
landscape.
A Volcanic Neck from Big Bend National Park
Devil's Tower, Wyoming
Ring Dykes
Ring dykes are large, near vertical dykes with a circular outcrop
pattern. Their thickness varies from hundreds of metres to several
kilometres, and the diameter can be up to 30 km. Thicker dykes
contain plutonic rocks, rather than hypabyssal. They are centred
around a deeper intrusion. The central section may be a block that
has sunken into the underlying magma, the ring dykes representing the
fracture zone around the sunken block.
Cone Sheets
Cone sheets are minor intrusions which occur as a dyke swarm with
a concentric distribution. They dip towards a focus, generally
several kilometres deep, at angles between 20o and
70o, but typically at around 45o.


===== igneous_07a.html =====


GeoI Lecture Notes: Igneous Rocks
Eruption of Magma & Volcanic Hazards
Basaltic Eruptions
Basaltic magmas have a low viscosity and are low in volatiles. The
low viscosity allows the magma to migrate to the surface and allows
the volatiles to escape more easily when the pressure is reduced
sufficiently for the volatiles to exsolve from the melt. Basalt
therefore is extruded in gentle, effusive eruptions.
Hawaiian Lava Fountain


===== igneous_07b.html =====


GeoI Lecture Notes: Igneous Rocks
Basaltic Volcanoes
Shield Volcanoes
As basalt lava has a low viscosity, it is capable of flowing great
distances from the vent over low gradients. Shield volcanoes are
built up from successive flows that bury the older flows from
previous eruptions, eventually forming a large, dome shaped volcano
with slopes of less than 10o . 
The Hawaiian volcanoes of
Mauna Loa and Mauna Kea are examples of shield volcanoes and are the
largest single objects on Earth, having summits over 4000 m above sea
level, but being built from the ocean floor which is around 5000 m
deep. 
Mauna Loa
This 4169 m high basaltic shield volcano is the Earth's largest
volcanic construct, rising some 9000 m above the Pacific ocean floor.
It has a volume of about 40,000 cubic kilometers, the result of the
accumulation of innumerable flows of low-viscosity basalt lava. Only
about 17% of this volume is above sea-level.  Submarine eruptions
probably commenced 1-2 million years ago, and eruptions above sea level
about 400,000 years ago. The extremely gentle slopes seen in the
photograph result from the fact that Mauna Loa is an elongate volcano,
extended along south-west and east rifts, from which most lavas are
erupted. The profile across the rift zones (towards the camera) is
somewhat steeper, but still does not exceed 10 degrees in the middle
slopes. At the summit of Mauna Loa is the 2.6 x 4.5 km Mokuaweoweo
caldera. Mauna Loa last erupted in 1984
On large shield volcanoes, the partial emptying of the magma
chamber may leave the summit unsupported and it may collapse inward
to form a large crater, or caldera.
Halemaumau Caldera and Volcanic Observatory, Hawaii Volcanoes NP
Commonly, the central feeder pipe is not the only conduit, and
flank eruptions may be produced on the side of the volcano.
Kilauea is built from flank eruptions on Mauna Loa's south-eastern
slope.
Cinder Cones
Surrounding the eruption point, rapid degassing of volatiles due
to pressure release may produce lava fountaining. The resulting
shower of pyroclastic particles builds up a relatively small,
steep-sided cone with slopes around 30o. For basaltic
eruptions, these highly vesicular particles are called
scoria , and the cones are frequently referred to as
scoria cones.
Cinder Cone in Northern Arizona
Diatremes
A diatreme is an explosive vent of a volcanic eruption. There need
not be any actual volcano associated with the diatreme.
HOPI BUTTES VOLCANIC FIELD, NE ARIZONA
Massive tuffacous breccia of the diatreme facies.  This exhumed vent
stands over 100 meters above the surrounding badlands.
Maars
Maars are explosive, phreatomagmatic (water-rich) eruptions that
produce volcanoes with wide craters, but of quite low elevation. They
have low gradient outer slopes, with steep inner walls of the crater.
When the volcano becomes extinct, a lake is frequently formed in the
crater, which gradually becomes filled with sediment, producing
swamps and peat deposits.


===== igneous_07c.html =====


GeoI Lecture Notes: Igneous Rocks
Features of Basaltic Lava Flows
Pahoehoe
Pahoehoe is characterised by a ropy texture. It is formed when
fluid lava begins to congeal, and is subjected to further lateral
pressure, which pushes the lava into folds or ropes. Pahoehoe is
typical of low viscosity basaltic lava that still retains much of its
original volatiles.
Aa
Basaltic lava that is more viscous than pahoehoe, and has a lower
volatile content may produce a more blocky, angular form of lava,
known as aa. As pahoehoe flows away from the vent, it cools and loses
volatiles, which increases its viscosity and may lead to an aa flow.
Higher velocity flow of lava, producing a more turbulent, rather than
laminar flow, can also lead to an aa flow.
Pillow Lava
Lavas that either erupt under water, or lava flows that flow into
water produce a characteristic pillow lava. The lava in direct
contact with the water is quenched, but continued pressure from the
molten flow cracks the skin, and liquid lava oozes out, forming a
bulging pillow shape. The surface of this new pillow is quenched by
the water within a few seconds. Continued pressure from the molten
lava that is still flowing through the connected pillows cracks the
skin and the process is repeated.
Pillow Lavas in Minnesota
Pillow Lavas in Scotland
Columnar Jointing
When a lava flow cools, it contracts slightly. This contraction
leads to a polygonal fracturing on the surface, similar to mudcracks
on a dry river bed. As cooling continues down into the flow, this
fracture network is maintained, producing columns of fractures. Later
erosion of the flow is concentrated along the fractures, and
prismatic columns can be seen.
The columns form by chilling when in contact with a flat surface.  Cracks
form at 120o and join up to become hexagons.  They exend perperdicular
to the flat surface.
Devil's Postpile, California
Giant's Causeway in Ireland
The story goes that a giant in Ireland, Finn Cool, built the causeway to
fight his rival in Scotland, Finn Gall.  Cool was exhausted after his labors and
returned to Ireland to rest.  Gall crossed over the causeway to do battle, but
Cool's fast-thinking wife told Gall that the sleeping Cool was their child.  Gall
was so intimidated by the thought of what the father of such a baby would look
like that he immediately returned to Scotlond, destroying the causeway on his
way back.
Lava Rises
Recent work on thick (up to 20 m) lava flows has shown that the
original emplacement of the flow began as a relatively thin (around 1
m) unit that was subsequently inflated by the pressure of still
molten lava beneath an early formed crust. Such thick flows were
previously interpreted as either being thick valley fill flows, or aa
flows that could maintain steep sides. The presence of pahoehoe
structures that are continuous from the floor of the lava rise, up
the sides and across the top, however, is evidence of lava much more
fluid than aa. Lava rises generally have crevasses along their edges
where the solidified surface has buckled during inflation. 
The inflation of a
point source, rather than an elongate flow, produces a mound of
inflated basalt known as a tumulus. Tumuli also
commonly show ropy lava along the sides, with elongate or radial
crevasses.
Tumulus about 30 m in diameter on the Hilina Pali road on the south
flank of Kilauea Volcano, Hawaii. 
Lava Tubes
Channelised lava flows frequently form a solid crust, under which
the liquid lava continues to flow. If the flow drains out, an open
space, or lava tube is created. The flowing lava often erodes into
the base of the tube, and the various levels of the lava can be seen
as "tide marks" on the sides of the tubes. Lava drips are common on
the roof and walls of the tubes.
Lava Tube, Hawaii
Tree Casts
Lava flowing around objects like trees will solidfy around them, leaving
molds.
Tree Casts, Hawaii
Spatter Cones
Spatter cones are piles of viscous partially cooled lava that erupt
from small vents or fissures towards the end of an eruption cycle.
Spatter Cones from the Galapagos Islands
Flood Basalts
Some regions on earth record huge outpourings of basalt, the
largest of which is the Ontong-Java Plateau in the equatorial west
Pacific. This region consists of oceanic crust 25 to 43 km thick - up
to five times as thick as typical oceanic crust, and is two-thirds
the size of Australia. It overlies oceanic crust with magnetic
stripes typical of an oceanic ridge. There are apparently no large
shield volcanoes, so the lava must have erupted from long fissures.
The plateau was formed around 120 million years ago (mid-Cretaceous)
and the entire plateau seems to have been created in less than 3
million years. This implies that 15 to 20 km3 per year was
erupted, which is comparable to the amount formed today by the entire
oceanic ridge system, and dwarfs the Mount St Helens eruption of less
than 1 km3. Such vast outpourings are believed to
represent the decompressional melting of a new mantle plume as it
rises to the upper mantle.
Other notable flood basalt provinces include the Kerguelen plateau
of the southern Indian Ocean, the Deccan traps of India, the Siberian
traps, the Parana basalts of Brazil and southern Africa, the Karoo
basalts of South Africa, the basalts of Northern Ireland, Scotland,
Greenland and the Columbia River Basalts of northwestern USA.
Columbia River Basalts
Icelandic Basalt Flow


===== igneous_07d.html =====


GeoI Lecture Notes: Igneous Rocks
Hazards associated with Basaltic Eruptions
Lava flows
As basaltic eruptions are effusive, low viscosity and have low
volatiles, they are relatively gentle eruptions, and the danger from
explosive activity is minimal. The volume of lava they produce, and
its low viscosity, however, means that considerable areas can be
overrun by the lava flows. The main hazard, therefore, is loss of
property and production. In the long term, basaltic eruptions are
most beneficial, as they produce very fertile soils.
In 1783, eight months of eruptions from a 32 km long fissure in
Iceland, known as the Laki eruption, produced over 12 km3
of lava which covered nearly 600 km2 and destroyed much of
the island's grazing land. Livestock were poisoned by grass
contaminated by hydrogen fluoride. 20% of Iceland's population, some
10,000 people, died of starvation.
Laki Fissure
Gaseous escape
Gaseous discharges associated with basaltic eruptions can cause
fatalities, but the danger zone is restricted to quite close to the
source of the eruption.
Some volcanic crater lakes develop gas-rich layers. Lake Monoun
and Lake Nyos in Cameroon have discharged lethal amounts of carbon
dioxide. A discharge form Lake Monoun in 1984 killed 37 people, but a
larger discharge from Lake Nyos in 1986 killed over 1700 people and
3000 cattle. The CO2 had seeped into the base of the
density layered lake, where its concentration built up in the bottom
layers. Eventually an overturn of the layers released the stored
gases. The dense cloud flowed down the valleys, asphyxiating people
who did not realise what was wrong, as CO2 has no odour
and the body does not react to it. Survivors told of smelling rotten
eggs or gunpowder, experiencing a warm sensation and rapidly losing
consciousness.
Lake Nyos
Victims of gas release
Winds Released the Gas at the Bottom of the Lake
A pumping system has been trialled at Lake Monoun to release the
gases gradually, but the larger Lake Nyos poses a harder problem. A
wrongly engineered system could initiate a gas discharge, rather than
preventing one. Concentrations of carbon dioxide in Lake Nyos are
expected to build up to dangerous concentrations again in less than
20 years.
Climate change
Some flood basalts have been linked with past mass extinction
episodes due to their effects on the global atmosphere and climate.
The Siberian Traps erupted at the end of the Permian period and
corresponds to the greatest mass extinction in Earth's history. At
the end of the Cretaceous period, the Deccan traps erupted, covering
over half a million square kilometres and may have helped in the
extinction of the dinosaurs.
Location of the Deccan Traps
Buddist dwellings in the Deccan Traps
Traps vs. Extinction: More than a coincidence?


===== igneous_07e.html =====


GeoI Lecture Notes: Igneous Rocks
Andesitic Eruptions
As andesitic magma has a higher viscosity and higher volatile
content than basaltic magma, andesitic eruption tend to be high
energy, explosive eruptions.
Andesitic Volcanoes
Stratovolcanoes
Andesitic volcanoes are typically comprised of layers of andesitic
lava flows and pyroclastic deposits. The slopes are gentle concave,
varying from around 6o at the base to about 30o
near the summit. This is the typical volcano profile typified by Mt
Fuji in Japan. The higher viscosity builds a steeper cone than the
basaltic shield volcanoes, and the layers of lava help prevent
erosion of the weaker pyroclastic deposits, and so build larger cones
than tephra (or cinder / scoria) cones.
Agua Volcano, Equador
Seen in profile at sunset, this photo illustrates the classical
symmetrical cone that defines the 'ideal' volcano. Such cones result
from the interplay of eruption and erosional processes, and rely on
eruption of small lavas and tephra from a single summit crater and
rapid radial transport of talus to maintain their radial symmetry. Agua
is 3752 m high, with a summit crater 200 m in diameter. Its symmetrical
profile is echoed by the two volcanoes in the background, Fuego (left;
3700 m) and Acatenango (right; 3960 m).
Lascar Volcano
Volcan Lscar 5,641 m, is the most active volcano in the central
Andes. Since 1988 a silicic lava dome has been growing in the summit
crater, and there have been several recent eruptions, notably on April
19 and 20, 1993, when pyroclastic flows were erupted on both southern
and northern flanks, and ash fell out as far distant as Buenos Aires,
Argentina. The volcano consists of elongate series of six overlapping
craters, trending roughly northeast, with the active, fuming crater
located near the center of this cluster. It is about 800 m in diameter
and 300 m deep. Grey pumice deposits from the 1993 eruption are visible
in this photo, and the margins of some pyroclastic flows can be seen at
right center. Most impressive, however, are the older, massive
andesitic lava flows, exhibiting flow margins tens of meters high, well
developed flow leves and transverse ridges.
Calderas
Calderas are large, steep sided craters that are several
kilometres in diameter. Most commonly, they are caused by the
collapse of the overlying volcano into a magma chamber that has been
partially emptied by vigorous eruptions.
Crater Lake, Oregon
Crater Lake's serenity belies a violent origin. Its blue waters
fill a caldera nine kilometers in diameter, whose floor is 600 meters
below the lake level, while the encompassing walls rise steeply 600
meters above it. Howel Williams, a distinguished American volcanologist
of Welsh extraction, concluded in a classic study that the present
caldera occupies the site of an older volcanic cone, about 3600 meters
high, called Mt. Mazama. 6,800 years ago, a huge plinian eruption
destroyed the original volcano, formed the present caldera and showered
tephra as far as Alberta in Canada. After the plinian phase, a series
of ignimbrites was erupted, filling the valleys radiating from the old
cone. Wizard Island, a small volcanic cone constructed after the
eruption, now occupies one corner of the lake.
Lava domes
Viscous lava with few volatiles oozes from a volcanic vent and
builds a lava dome, rather than flowing out from the vent as a lava
flow. This is commonly the case after large volcanic eruption have
allowed the release of large amounts of volatiles, leaving a dry,
viscous magma. This can ooze out of the vent and build a lava dome in
the crater of the volcano.


===== igneous_07f.html =====


GeoI Lecture Notes: Igneous Rocks
Hazards Associated With Andesitic Eruptions
In viscous magmas, the gas bubbles, too, can only rise slowly and
can not easily escape from the melt. The confined energy of exsolving
gas may build up until devastating explosive volcanism results.
Blocks have been ejected at velocities of 2000 km/hr with pressures
involved of over 4000 atmospheres. Eruption columns can reach up to
45 km into the atmosphere. Where the density of the eruption column
equals that of the surrounding atmosphere, it spreads out like the
mushroom cloud of an atomic bomb. High level winds distribute after
major eruptions so that the ash encircles the earth. This can
decrease the amount of the sun's energy, causing global temperatures
to fall by 1oC or so. It also produces spectacular sunsets
and quickens the degrading of aeroplane paint work and windows.
Pyroclastic Flows / Nue Ardentes (Glowing Ash
Clouds)
The most lethal volcanic eruptions are caused by pyroclastic
flows. At several hundred degrees centigrade, the ash flows can
travel over 100 km, and may reach speeds of 700 km/hr. Such flows may
be generated by gravitational collapse of the
eruption column. The eruption column is held up by the pressure of
the erupting material beneath it. Eventually, the eruption can not
support the weight of the eruption column and the column collapses,
flowing down the slopes of the volcano and covering the surrounding
area. Trapped air and magmatic gases keeps the flow buoyant, leading
to little frictional resistance, so speeds of over 150 km/hr may be
reached, even on gentle slopes. On settling, the particles may still
be hot enough to fuse together to form a welded tuff or
ignimbrite.
In 1902, a nue ardente flowed down the slopes of Mt
Pele in Martinique in the West Indies, covering the town of
St Pierre. Of the 29,000 inhabitants, there was only one survivor - a
prisoner in the underground cells who later earned a living by
telling his tale at fair grounds. For several months after the
eruption, viscous lava domes oozed out of the crater and pushed up in
a spire like toothpaste. The spire repeatedly crumbled, producing a
hot avalanche that rushed down the slopes of the volcano.
Alternatively, part of the volcano may collapse during an
eruption, allowing the eruption of material to occur sideways in a
lateral blast . Such a blast occurred during the
eruption of Mt St Helens in 1980. The northern face of the volcano
collapsed, allowing pressure to be released laterally, and causing
the initial explosive eruption to be both upwards and sideways,
devastating an area of over 600 km2 extending 30 km from
the volcano, and killing 63 people, including geologist David Johnson
who was monitoring the eruption. A small lava dome has subsequently
been built in the new crater.
The volume of ash involved in large eruptions can cause severe
problems. Agricultural production is destroyed, which may lead to
famine, and buildings may collapse under the weight of the ash. Most
of the deaths caused by the 1991 Mt Pinatubo eruption were not caused
by the eruptions, but by the resulting disease, lack of water and
sanitation and related problems in temporary camps for the homeless.
The once fertile fields and valleys around Mt Pinatubo are now barren
and near useless for agriculture.
Volcanic ash clouds are particularly dangerous to aircraft, as
aircraft radar can not, as yet, discriminate ash clouds from normal
clouds. As aircraft engines operate at temperatures greater than that
required to melt volcanic ash, flying into ash clouds melts the ash
particles which solidify on the walls of the engine and on the
turbines, causing engine failure. Just the cost of the replacement of
windows due to crazing by ash particles adds significantly to the
cost of aircraft operation.
Ash from Mt. Pinatubo on Commercial Airplane
Lahars
Lahars are mudflows generated by volcanic activity. Unconsolidated
and easily eroded ash may remain a mudflow hazard for many years
after a large eruption, particularly in tropical regions where
monsoonal rains generate high runoff.
Lahars may also be triggered by the eruption, as glacial ice and
snow fields on the volcano are suddenly thawed at the onset of an
eruption, creating a flash flood that combines with the volcanic ash
and previous pyroclastic deposits on the flanks of the volcano.
In 1985, the Colombian volcano, Nevado del Ruiz erupted, melting
ice and snow near the summit which generated a lahar that destroyed
the city of Armero, killing over 20,000 people. Geologists had
previously issued warnings about the danger of lahars and, eight
hours before the tragedy, had urged that Armero be evacuated. The
warning went unheeded.
Mudflow, Chigliapichina volcano, north Chile 
Tsunamis
Undersea eruptions can trigger shock waves that create giant waves
called tsunamis (sometimes incorrectly called tidal waves). When
Krakatoa erupted in 1883, it produced the largest concussion ever
recorded. Krakatoa is a small, uninhabited island group between
Sumatra and Java. The tsunami generated by the eruption swept the
coasts of Sumatra and Java about half an hour after the explosion,
killing some 36,000 people.
A 1960's flick for the Geographically Challenged.
Now available on DVD.
The seamount Loihi, which will be the next Hawaiian island, poses
a potential threat to the present islands. In 1996 an 300 m dome at
its summit collapsed over a period of two months, to be replaced by a
crater a kilometre wide and over 300 m deep. If the collapse had been
catastrophic, rather than more gradual, it could have created a
tsunami that would have developed without warning.


===== igneous_07g.html =====


GeoI Lecture Notes: Igneous Rocks
Rhyolitic Eruptions
Rhyolitic magma is even more viscous and contains more volatiles
than andesitic magma. Eruptions can therefore be explosively
catastrophic. Pumice is an extremely vesicular, glassy rock
formed as gas bubbles out of the vent as a froth of lava.
Due to the viscosity, rhyolitic lava does not flow far from the
vent, but produces either lava domes, or short, thick flows. Such
flows are generated after pyroclastic eruptions, once the volatiles
have been released from the magma.
Rhyolitic volcanoes and eruptions are similar to those of
andesites, but can be more powerful and more dangerous. Fortunately,
rhyolitic volcanism is much less frequent than andesitic volcanism as
most rhyolitic magma solidifies underground as plutonic granite.
One of the largest eruptions known on Earth was the eruption of
Lake Taupo, in the north island of New Zealand 22,000 years ago. The
eruption threw out over 300 cubic kilometres of material in a matter
of days, covering the entire island in at least a centimetre of
ash.
In 186 AD, after eight smaller, intervening eruptions, another
huge eruption occurred from Taupo. The eruption was initially on dry
land, but as it developed, subsidence of the crater allowed lake
water to pour into the vent. 20 cubic km of pumice, rock and ash was
ejected in less than a day, forming an eruption cloud up to 50 km
high. As the roof collapsed further, 12 km3 of material
was ejected in a few hours (one estimate suggests less than seven
minutes). The eruption cloud collapsed, and burst outwards close to
the speed of sound, covering hills and valleys in all directions for
90 km and up to 100 m thick near the lake. Over 110 km3
had been ejected and the roof of the magma chamber collapsed
completely, forming a wide caldera.
Distribution of ash deposits from the Taupo eruption. Isopachs
(lines were deposit has a constant thickness) are in cm. From Wilson
and Walker (1985). 
The Taupo Volcanic Zone is still active, although it looks pretty bucolic
at the moment.
View of Lake Taupo
Examples of Rhyolitic eruptions closer to home are Yellowstone in NW Wyoming
(at the end of a hot spot trace) and Long Valley in California.  The last
catastrophic eruption in Yellowstone was about 640,000 years ago and was about
1000 times larger than the last eruption of Mt. St. Helens.
Volumes of Yellowstone's giant volcanic eruptions compared with volumes of other major eruptions.
Presently, Yellowstone is extremely photogenic, and home of some
interesting thermophile bacteria like Thermus aquaticus, which is used
to make an enzyme that allows rapid reproduction of DNA, which in turn
made DNA fingerprinting possible.
Long Valley last had a major eruption 760,000 years ago, but several
relatively minor features tend to erupt with frequencies of a few 100
years.
Mono-Inyo Eruptions During the Past 5,000 Years. During the past 35,000
years, volcanic activity in the the Long Valley area has been confined
to the Mono-Inyo Craters volcanic chain. About 20 small to moderate
eruptions have occurred somewhere along the chain in the last 5,000
years, as shown in diagram above. Some of the eruptions occurred at
about the same time and in close proximity.  For example, the Inyo
eruptions 550 to 600 years and the eruptions from the north end of the
Mono Craters about 600 years ago. The intervals between eruptions or
eruption clusters ranges from 250 years to 750 years.
Earthquake activity in the area picked up in the early 1980's and it
has been closely monitored by the USGS since then.
Areas of the United Stated that once were covered by volcanic
ash from Yellowstone's gian eruptions 2 million and 630,000 years ago,
compared with ashfall from the 760,000-year-old Long Valley caldera
eruptions at Mammoth Lakes, California, and the 1980 eruption of Mount
St. Helens, Washington. (Adapted from Sarna-Wojcicki, 1991.)


===== igneous_08.html =====


GeoI Lecture Notes: Igneous Rocks
Summary of Some Key Ideas About Volcanoes
Important factors in Understanding Volcano Behavior
The amount of "volatiles" (gas) dissolved in the magma (i.e., stuff that is really low density and wants desperately to leave)
The viscosity of the magma (i.e., how easy is it for the volatiles to leave?) 
The quantity of magma (i.e., how much needs to get out?) 
Generally, the more viscous a magma is, the more explosive the eruption will be.
What controls Viscosity?
Temperature: Higher temperatures, lower viscosity, especially if the temperatures are well above the solidification temperature. (700oC for Silicic, 1200oC for mafic rocks). 
Silica (SiO2) content. The tetrahedra start to organize themselves well before solidification, and this greatly increases viscosity. 
Dissolved gasses: more gas lowers viscosity, so there is something of a negative feedback at work here. 
Patterns of Volcanism
Most oceanic volcanoes have basaltic laves: (ridges, hot spots). 
Ocean - Ocean convergence: basalt and andesite (island arcs) 
Ocean - Continent convergence: basalt, andesite, and rhyolite (Andes, Pac NW). 
Why is this?
Oceans: basalt and gabbro
Continents: granite and other felsic rocks 
Upper mantle: ultramafic (peridotite). 
Asthenosphere is a primary source region for magma. Basalt is molten component of asthensophere, so felsic lavas must have another origin. 
Possibilities: 
remelt continent;
remelt seds derived from these rocks and deposited on ocean (in subduction zones).
"refine" basaltic magma through "differentiation" - olivine crystallizes first and settles to bottom. (could be used for making andesite, but rhyolite less likely). Note: In Iceland, the longer period between eruptions, the more felsic it is (more time for differentiation).
Mitigation/Prediction?
Death rate: 200,000 people/500 years 
Property: St. Helens: 1 billion. Mt Rainier would be much more costly. 
Precursors: EQs, tilt, tremor, heat flow, resistivity, magnetism (Curie temp): all related to magma flow. Exact moment of explosion difficult to predict, but intermediate term is good (much better than EQs). Case of Mammoth lakes: Long Valley Caldera - evidence of a mega-eruption about 100,000 years ago. Lots of activity suggest magma on the move. 
Control: Cooling or redirecting of basaltic lava flows (Iceland: Heimaey in 1973).
 
Effects can be predicted based on past experiences, however. 
Some Benefits of Volcanoes:
Exceptionally fertile soils 
Sources of industrial materials: pumice, boric acid, ammonia 
Thermal Energy (Italy, New Zealand, US, Mexico, Japan). 
Clues to the Earth's interior, and its history. 
Old Faithful
Geothermal Electric Plant, North Island, New Zealand


