===== Weathering_01.html =====


Geo I: Weathering and Soil
Geo I
Weathering:
Making a Molehill out of a Mountain
What is weathering?
Generally, it is the "breaking down" or destruction of a material
(rocks and minerals) when exposed to air, moisture and organic
matter. Because it involves near-surface processes, weathering is
within the realm of GeoII. However, because it is a vital part
ofthe rock cycle, we need to review some of the basic ideas here.
Rocks and minerals are generally formed at, or have
been subjected to, conditions that are very different from those at the surface
of the earth. Notably, temperatures and pressures at the surface are much
different from those that most rocks and minerals have been subjected to.
Weathering is a process of re-equilibration of the rocks and minerals to the
new conditions they are in.
Two main types:
Physical (mechanical)
disintegration. Big pieces become little pieces without chemical
alteration.
Chemical decomposition
(e.g., by exposure to acids)
Note: Weathering is NOT Erosion!
Erosion is: The Removal and Transportation of material.
Weathering is an agent that facilitates erosion. Note that some texts
differentiate between Erosion and Transportation,but this is splitting
hairs. 


===== Weathering_02.html =====


Geo I: Weathering and Soil
Physical/Mechanical Weathering
This is the physical pulling apart of rocks and minerals,
or, in other words, making little rocks out of big rocks. Relatively more
important in arid, alpine regions (just because the alternative, chemical
weathering, is muted).
Important agents: 
Pressure Release
Rocks formed deep in the earth's
crust (e.g. granitoids) are formed under high pressures, due to the weight of
the overlying rocks. As the rock moves towards the surface (by isostatic
rebound due to the erosion of the overlying rocks, or by tectonic forces), the
pressure decreases. The rock responds to the decrease in pressure by expanding
slightly. As it does so, a series of fractures develops, known as joints.
Joints are generally formed in sets of parallel planes and there are frequently
more than one set of joints developed. Generally, joints disappear below a
depth of around 50 m. Once formed, joints act as passageways for the movement
of fluids through the rock, facilitating physical and chemical weathering. 
Weathering
along vertical joints in Limestone; Tennessee.
Pressure release also creates sheet
joints and exfoliation (Half Dome in Yosemite/Stone Mountain in Georgia).
Big
Thompson Canyon, Colorado
Yosemite
National Park, CA
Stone
Mountain, Georgia
Marbles can crack with removal of
just a few meters of overburden. Rock bursts in mines are a serious
hazard.
Temperature:
Water freezes and expands by 10%; causes
"frost wedging"; produces joints. Can also cause "frost
heaving", which provides a vertical lift (a problem with highways!).
Frost Wedging in
Limestone
Joints can also be formed by contraction as a rock
cools. When dykes, sills and lava flows cool, a polygonal pattern of joints may
form at the surface. As cooling progresses into the rock body, the fractures
form into long columnar joints.
Contraction Cracks
in Lava; Utah.
Typical product of wedging is
"talus" (angular pieces of rock) at the base of slopes of
mountains.
Talus
in the Brooks Range, Alaska
Important in cold climates
(freezing necessary)
Theoretically, daily expansion and contraction of
rocks that are heated by the sun and cool down at night should lead to physical
weathering similar to that of frost wedging. However, such a process has not
been proved to actually occur. The more intense heat of forest fires does lead
to the rapid expansion of outer rinds of rock, which expands and breaks off as
a spall. Although severe fires are relatively uncommon, over long periods of
time their cumulative effects can be significant.
Abrasion:
Grinding away of rock by friction
and impact during transportation.
Plant and animal activity:
Animals burrow, plant roots are
efficient wedges.
Salt Crystals
Salt (or other) crystals can take
up more volume when they form, causing the rock to break apart. Similar
to frost wedging.
Tectonic Processes:
Jointing is also produced by tectonic activity. In
particular, folding will produce a number of joint sets.


===== Weathering_03.html =====


Geo I: Weathering and Soil
Chemical Weathering
Minerals in igneous and metamorphic rocks formed at high temperatures and
pressures are chemically unstable under surface conditions, and break down to
form new, stable minerals. Weakly acidic aqueous solutions are the principal
agents of chemical weathering, so chemical weathering is most effective in
warm, wet climates.
Minerals that are the most out of equilibrium are the most susceptible to
chemical weathering. In igneous rocks, the order of crystallization of common
minerals is olivine, pyroxene, amphibole, biotite, K-feldspar, muscovite and
quartz, with Ca-rich plagioclase beginning to crystallize around the same time
as pyroxene, and, as temperature decreases, crystallization of increasingly
more Na-rich plagioclase in a continuous reaction until around the temperature
where biotite is crystallizing. This is known as Bowen's Reaction Series.
The sequence of mineral stability is the opposite of the crystallization
sequence of Bowen's reaction series. As olivine crystallize at the highest
temperatures, it is most out of equilibrium and is most susceptible to chemical
weathering. Quartz is not only closer to its equilibrium temperature, but,
being simply SiO2, it is extremely resistant to chemical attack.
Main types:
Solution
  
dissolve minerals
  
Hydrolysis
  
Complex reactions with H+ and OH-
  
Oxidation
  
"rusting" by addition of Oxygen
  
Hydration
  
Combination of minerals with water
  
Details:
Solution:
The simplest weathering reaction is the dissolution of soluble minerals. The
electrically polar water molecule is effective in breaking ionic bonds such as
those in Halite (NaCl).
Hydrolysis:
Hydrolysis involves the displacement of ions in a mineral's structure by H+
or OH- from water molecules. Aluminium rich silicates, such as feldspars,
are weathered primarily by hydrolysis.
Hydrolysis of potassium feldspar may result in kaolinite and quartz
2KAlSi3O8
+ 2H+ + H2O <=>
2K+ + Al2Si2O5(OH)4 +
4SiO2
or in a muscovite, (sericite) and quartz
3KAlSi3O8
+ 2H+ <=> 2K+
+ KAl3Si3O10(OH)2 + 6SiO2
Note that these last two reactions involve the replacement of K+
ions with H+ ions. The potassium ions pass into solution and are
removed from the rock.
Acid Hydrolysis:
Other minerals need a stronger attraction, which is provided by acids. 
Acids easily give up an extra H+, which can easily substituted
for other positive Ions in minerals like Ca++ and Na+ and
K+ (in feldspars). This changes the composition and disrupts
the atomic structure. 
Some acids, like Sulfuric and Hydrofluoric, are emitted by volcanoes, but
the most common is a weak carbonic acid (H2CO3) which
occurs about everywhere. 
The trick is to combine Carbon Dioxide with water: 
CO2
+ H2O -> H2CO3 -> H+ +
HCO3-
CO2 exists in the atmosphere, so rain will necessarily be
somewhat acidy. However, gasses in the soil have a LOT of CO2
(10%) so rain that leaches through soil will have pack an acidic punch.
Oxidation of reduced organic matter in soils is catalyzed by micro-organisms,
where bacteria mediate the oxidation of dead organic matter to CO2.
Representing organic matter by carbohydrate (CH2O) the reaction is
CH2O + O2 <=> CO2 + H2O
The carbon dioxide and water can then combine to produce carbonic acid.
This acid works to completely dissolve limestone (Calcite). It is the
mechanism of production of caves and karsts (sinkholes) - a big problem in
several states (Florida, Kansas). It is also a problem for buildings,
statues,and tombstones: 
CaCO3 + H+
+ HCO3- ->2Ca++ + 2HCO3-
Note that only ions (in solution) result. 
 
Another example: SO2 and NO2 in the atmosphere produce
sulfuric and nitric acid that becomes acid rain. An important source of
these agents is burning of fossil fuels. 
Hydrolysis refers to the reaction of minerals to the H+ and OH-
ions of water. If we add carbonic acid as well we can break down a
lot of common minerals. The reaction with Feldspar produces common
clays: 
2KAlSi3O8
+ 2H+ + 2HCO2- + H2O -> Al2Si2O5(OH)4
+ 2K+ + 2HCO3- + 4SiO2
or 
Potassium Feldspar +
Carbonic Acid + Water -> Clay Minerals + Soluble Ions (Potassium and
Bicarbonate) and Silica
Note that in this process we change a framework silicate into a sheet
silicate. This means a significant reduction of strength. 
The silica is excess that doesn't fit into the clay structure. It will
play an important part in cementing together sedimentary rocks. 
The same reaction works with Plagioclase Feldspars. In this case Ca
and Na are in solution. Ca inhibits reactions with detergents and
precipitates as scales in water pipes. We call this "hard"
water. 
Reaction with other minerals:
Quartz (SiO2) has strong bonds and is not easily weathered.
Thus, it usually hangs around long after everything else has weathered and
eroded. Nevertheless, silica is
generally removed in solution by the formation of silicic acid, H4SiO4,
as this simply requires the addition of extra water, as 
2H2O + SiO2
=> H4SiO4.
The removal of soluble matter from bedrock or regolith is called leaching.
Ferromags like olivine, pyroxene, and amphibole weather in a similar fashion
to feldspars. In this case, iron and magnesium are exchanged for H+.
 
Oxidation/Hydration:
Oxidation refers to reactions with Oxygen to form Oxides. 
Minerals with a lot of Fe (e.g., Olivine, pyroxene, amphibole) will turn
reddish as the Fe in them rusts by combining with Oxygen and water from
atmosphere (turns to an iron oxide mineral). 
 
4Fe + 3O2
-> 2Fe2O3
Iron + Oxygen -> Iron Oxide (Hematite)
Hydration refers to the absorption of water into a mineral. This can
cause expansion (particularly in clays) and weakening of bonds. 
 


===== Weathering_04.html =====


Geo I: Weathering and Soil
Rates of Weathering
What controls how fast something weathers? Weathering is something that
happens at the surface, so important factors are: 
Grain size - the
     smaller the grain, the more surface area, the faster the weathering.
Biological Activity -
     Burrowing animals (ants, termites, rabbits, ...) turn over the soil,
     exposing it more fully to chemical action. Decomposition by
     micro-organisms and the presence of soil organic matter greatly increase
     the CO2 concentration in soil water, making it acidic and
     producing carbonic acid. 
Relief - On steep
     slopes, weathering products are quickly removed by erosion or mass movement
     processes, revealing new material that can be weathered. On gentle slopes
     and in valleys and basins, the accumulation of weathered products may
     produce a protective layer for the bedrock.
Climate - Chemical
     weathering dominates in hot, humid climes, physical in cool, arid
     climes. Industrial activity accelerates chemical weathering activity
     dramatically. Heat speeds up chemical reactions, with a rise of 10
     producing at least a doubling of reaction rate. The availability of water
     also allows rapid flushing and the removal of all but the most insoluble
     compounds, such as iron and aluminium oxides.
Parent material -
     Quartz is hard (forms last and so doesn't like to react). Beaches are made
     of Quartz. Olivine is not stable and weathers quickly. Follows
     Bowen's reaction series. The texture of the rock also influences
     weathering rates. Even a quartz rich rock will be susceptible to
     weathering if it has closely spaced, continuous joints. In beds of
     differing lithologies, the more easily weathered strata may undermine
     otherwise resistant beds.
Balanced Rock in Horizontal
Layers. Arches National Park,
Utah.
As weathering rates are generally in the order of a few millimetres per
hundred or thousand years for fresh bedrock, great periods of time are required
to produce weathering zone of great depth. 


===== Weathering_05.html =====


Geo I: Weathering and Soil
Effects of Chemical Weathering on Common Rocks
Different susceptibility of minerals to chemical weathering leads to
preferential concentration of certain minerals. The weathering of a granite by hydrolysis,
for example, will produce clay minerals and the removal of K, Na and Mg ions in
solution and leaving the relatively inert quartz grains. A basalt will weather
to clays and soluble ions of Na, Ca and Mg, with the production of some
goethite from the olivine and pyroxene. As limestone is weathered by
dissolution, only the impurities of clays and quartz remain.
Other chemically resistant minerals may also be preferentially concentrated,
such as gold and platinum. Laterites and bauxite deposits may be formed by the
preferential removal of soluble minerals. Low grade mineral deposits may become
economically viable after the secondary enrichment processes removes the more
soluble elements.
As chemical weathering effects surfaces that are exposed to the movement of
aqueous solutions, rocks are frequently quite fresh and unaltered when broken
open, but are altered on the surface. This is called a weathering rind.
When fractures form a mosaic of cuboid blocks, weathering proceeds faster at
the corners, where the minerals are "attacked" from three sides, than
at the edges of the blocks, and proceeds faster at the edges than on the faces.
This leads to roughly spherical boulders and the process is termed spheroidal
weathering. Some surfaces may spall off, or exfoliate.
Early Stages of Spheroidal Weathering
 
Advanced Spheroidal Weathering
 
Granite Boulders Produced by Spheroidal Weathering
(Wisconsin).


===== Weathering_06.html =====


Geo I: Weathering and Soil
The Dirt on Soils
What is soil?
Weathered rock and
mineral grains capable of supporting plant life.
Soil is the building block of civilization and, along with water, forms the
two basic ingredients for human survival. Mankind will continue to exist only
as long as the soil does. At present there is about one fertile acre per
person, but the amount of fertile land is decreasing and population is
increasing.
Where does soil come from?
Weathered rock
(deitritus), mostly, but mixed with other (organic/hummus) stuff:
Typical
composition of Soil:
Minerals
  
45%
  
Water
  
25%
  
Gases
  
20%
  
Organic Matter
  
5%
  
Soil typically is "stratified" into "horizons"; this is
largely the consequence of gravity and proximity to the atmosphere (the
weathering agent). 
Soil Horizons
O
Humus; provides CO2 from decaying mater -> carbonic
  acid
  
A
Zone of leaching: where minerals are strongly dissolved
  (top soil)
  humus is abundant and chemical weathering is active. The upper part of the
  A horizon contains most of the organic matter and is strongly leached. the
  concentration of humus tends to make the dark coloured near the surface. The
  lower part of the A horizon has much less organic matter and has suffered
  maximum leaching, particularly of Ca and Fe. The A horizon may be at the
  surface, or may underlay a O horizon composed of accumulated organic
  matter.
  
  
B
Zone of Accumulation: minerals from A are redeposited.
  largely a zone of deposition, where clay particles are trapped and solutes
  are absorbed. It is thus enriched in clay and/or iron and aluminium
  hydroxides.
  
C
Weathered transition zone (soil to rock) The
  sub-soil and consists of weathered bedrock grading into unweathered bedrock
  (the D horizon)
  
Depending on climate, these horizons are of varying thickness and may be
missing. 
Example: In the Desert, A is thin to none. B is cemented into
"caliche" (calcium carbonate crust); formed as percolating waters
evaporate and leave mineral load behind (this is because more water goes
"up" rather than "down"). 
Residual Soils: 
Soils that develop "in
situ" by weathering of underlying rock. 
Typically are heavy, clay rich, and expansive when
wet! Takes hundreds of years to produce 
Note: Clays have very small grain sizes and
are electrically charged: Thus, they hold water and nutrients on their surface.
Plants rely heavily on clay, although too much clay is not good (they are
notoriously impermeable). Because they are so complex, they are often a
nightmare for monitoring scientists! 
At the opposite end, Sand (Quartz) holds no water -
best soil is loam, a mixture of sand, clay, and silt (silt has a grain size
between 0.06 mm and 0.002 mm.  Generally, wet clay feels slimy, wet silt
feels grainy, and sand feels abrasive.)
Transported Soils: 
Soils formed on transported
regolith: types defined by how they were transported:
Alluvial
  
Rivers
  
Eolian
  
Wind
  
Glacial
  
Ice
  
Volcanic
  
Volcano
  
Glacial - especially
     important in New York; most of the soils came from Canada.
Loess - a glacially
     related Eolian soil; very fertile; covers most of midwest US.
Loess Bluffs; Mississippi
Loess; China


===== Weathering_07.html =====


Geo I: Weathering and Soil
Physical Properties of Soil
Soil is regolith material that is capable of sustaining plant growth. The
physical properties of soil are dominant factors affecting the use of a soil.
They determine the availability of oxygen and water and the ease of root
penetration.
Soil Texture
The relative proportions of sand, silt and clay size particles in a soil
determines the soil texture. Texture affects the permeability and porosity of
the soil, the ease of tilling, the amount of aeration and soil fertility. A
coarse sandy soil is easy to plough and has ample pore space for movement of
air and water, but it also dries out quickly and loses fertility as water is
drained away. Clay soils are difficult to wet, once wet are difficult to drain
and are difficult to till.
Textural names are based on the relative percentages of sand, silt and clay,
with a loam being a mixture. A classification scheme is shown below. There are
many variations on this, but they are simply slight differences in relative
percentages - the overall scheme remains the same. Note that this does not
include the organic fraction, and gravels sized particles are excluded.
Gravel sized particles are included in naming the soil if they comprise more
than 15% by volume of the soil. Thus a loamy sand with 20% cobbles would be a
"cobbly loamy sand". If there are >35% gravel, the word
"very" precedes the name. With more than 60% gravel, the word
"extremely" precedes the name.
Soil Structure
Structure refers to the arrangement of soil particles into aggregates held
together by organic substances, iron oxides, carbonates, clays and/or silica.
Natural aggregates are called peds whereas masses of soil broken into
masses by artificial means, such as tillage, are called clods. Concretions,
or nodules, are coherent masses formed within the soil by the
precipitation of minerals around a nucleus. Peds are described by
type (shape) - platy,
     prismatic, columnar, blocky, granular
class ( size) - very
     fine, fine, medium, coarse, very coarse
grade (strength) -
     weak, moderate, strong
The degradation of soil structure leads to compaction and the reduction in
the continuity, distribution and size of the soil pores. This results in
reduced porosity (decreases
     infiltration, increases runoff and erosion)
surface crusts (impedes crop
     emergence and reduces permeability)
poor aeration (reduces
     emergence and growth and increases susceptibility to root disease)
increased soil strength 
reduces root growth
less easily worked
      -> bigger tractors required -> further soil compaction, etc.
Soil structure decline is the most costly form of land degradation,
accounting for around 75% of total land degradation costs.
An increase in soluble and exchangeable Na+, speeds structure
degradation. The sodium does not effectively neutralize the surface negative
charge, so adjacent soil particles repel each other, due to similar charges,
leading to the destruction of peds by dispersion. The dispersed clays and small
organic colloids move with water, lodging in soil pores and sealing the soil.
Soil with too much sodium becomes almost impermeable to water and dries to hard
crusts.
Soil Density
Two measures of density are common for soils: particle density, which
is the density of the soil particles only and does not include water or pore
space, and bulk density, which is the density of a dry soil as it
naturally exists. Bulk density changes can be used to gauge soil structure
degradation over time and to determine if soils are too compacted to allow root
penetration or to provide adequate aeration.
Soil Porosity and Permeability
Porosity refers to the total connected pore spaces, and therefore how much
water can be held in the soil.
Permeability refers to the ease with which water can pass through the soil.
Water can drain by gravitational force from pore spaces larger than about
0.03-0.06 mm. In soils with pore spaces less than this, attraction forces in
the soil retain water and the soil becomes waterlogged and has poor aeration.
The smallest root hairs are between 0.0008 to 0.012 mm. Thus to a growing
plant, pore sizes are more important than total pore space.
Sands have large and continuous pore spaces, whereas clays have greater
porosity but much lower permeability. The best balance between water retention
(small pores) and adequate water and air movement (large pores) is medium
textured soils such as loams. Indurated soils formed from the precipitation of
soluble carbonates, silicates and iron, can create impermeable layers.
Soil Air
All organisms need gaseous exchanges to survive. Well aerated soils, where
oxygen exchange between soil air and atmospheric air is rapid, is required for
respiration by plant roots and for the decomposition of organic matter by
micro-organisms. Oxygen is the primary acceptor of electrons released in the
oxidation of carbon in organic materials. If the oxygen concentration is too
low, certain elements or ions become the electron acceptors and are, in turn,
reduced. When the oxygen diffusion rate is too low, the eH, or redox
potential, drops and toxic organic acids form, nitrate is denitrified and N
is lost to the atmosphere, sulphate is reduced to sulphide and most plant roots
can not respire. Consequently, plant root growth slows or stops.
Farming practices such as deep ripping, drainage of excess water, and
incorporation of "loosening" organic residues are partly designed to
aid soil aeration. Inadequate aeration can be expected with
poorly drained soils
soils with a high clay
     content after rainfall or irrigation
deep subsoils in clayey
     soils, especially if wet
highly compacted soils of
     fine texture
deeper portions of massive
     (structureless) clayey soils.
Soil Strength
Soil strength is the degree of resistance of a soil to crushing or breaking
when force is applied. It is measured either dry or wet with techniques ranging
from squeezing between thumb and forefinger to dropping a 1.36 kg pick on the
sample from a height of 0.22 m. Descriptive terms include "loose, friable,
firm, hard, cemented and indurated", with modifiers such as
"slightly, very and extremely".
Soil Color
Soil color reflects the soil's parent material or its development. Within
geographic regions, darker soils indicate higher organic content, but this can
not be correlated over diverse regions, as some partially decomposed material
is darker in some environments than in others, and darker colors may also
simply reflect different parent material. White colors are common when salts or
carbonates are present. Mottles may indicate periods of inadequate aeration
each year. Blue/grey/green colors are indicative of longer periods of
waterlogged conditions and inadequate aeration.
Soil color determination is standardized by comparison of the soil to
standard (Munsell) color charts. Soil color notation is divided into
Hue - red,
     yellow-red, yellow, green-yellow, green, blue-green, blue, purple-blue,
     purple, red-purple, with subdivisions into 2.5, 5, 7.5 and 10 units
Value - the relative
     darkness. Black = 0 and White = 10.
Chroma - purity or
     "brilliance" of the color, with 0 = neutral and 10 = brilliant.
Soil Temperature
The standard soil temperature is measured at a depth of 50 cm, or at the
rock or hardpan contact if the soil is not as thick as that. The temperature of
a soil depends on
supply - how much
     heat reaches the soil surface and
dissipation - what
     happens to the heat in the soil.
Heat supply will decrease with increased organic soil coverings and with the
angle of incidence of the slope with respect to the sun's rays. Latitude has an
obvious affect on this, too.
Light-coloured soils will reflect more heat than dark soils. Some heat
absorbed by soil is lost in evaporating soil water. Soils with a high water
content require much more heat to increase the temperature as the heat capacity
(or "heat reservoir") of water is 3-5 times that of soil minerals. A
dark soil with a high humus content may be cooler than lighter colored soils
with little humus, due to the larger amounts of water held by the humus
off-setting the larger heat absorption caused by the darker color.
Soil Water
Soils are water reservoirs, acting as a water supply between periods of
replenishment, but also aids root penetration by lubricating the soil, is
necessary for microbial mobility and action and allows nutrient mobility. In
dry soils, water uptake into plants stops nutrient absorption virtually ceases
and root growth practically stops.
Water is held in soils because of hydrogen bonding. The polar nature
of the water molecule allows the ions of individual water molecules to interact
with their neighbors. The bonds become more rigid in colder temperatures (ice
or snow).
It is also the polarity of the bonds that makes water an effective solvent
for ions; the water molecules are attracted to the ion by electrostatic force
to cluster around it. Moreover, ionic bonds are easily decomposed by the force
of attraction of the water dipole. Hydrogen bonding gives water a relatively
high viscosity and heat capacity in comparison to other solvents, and allows
water to exist over a large temperature range. This last property is
fundamental to life that relies on liquid biological transport systems.
Strong (by standards of intermolecular interactions) bonding forces allow
water films of considerable thickness to be held on the surface of soil
particles. Because the forces holding water in soil are surface-attractive
forces, the more surface area (the more clay and organic material) a soil has,
the greater the amount of adsorbed water.
 
Soil Water Potential
The strength with which water is held can be defined as the work the water
can do when it moves from its present state to a pool of water with a defined
reference state of 0. Elevated water has a positive potential, whereas adsorbed
water in soils is less free to move and has less free energy. Negative
free energy means that work must be done to move the water to the reference
pool of water. Water that is adjacent to particle surfaces has a lower (more
negative) potential than has water on the outside of a film, that is, water is
held more tightly as the negative value increases in magnitude.
Gravitational water is water held at a potential greater than -33 kPa.
Saturated flow water moves because of water potentials that are larger (less
negative) than -33 kPa. In many soils, such as soils with varied textures of
alternating sand and clay layers, this reference value is closer to -10 to -30
kPa. Stored water that is available to plants has water potentials between
approximately -33 and -1500 kPa, although this varies with plant species.
Water Flow Through Soils
Most rapid movement of water through soil is caused by gravity. Saturated
flow begins with infiltration. The movement of water through the wetted soil is
termed percolation. It is percolation that leaches nutrients and soluble ions
from the soil. Factors that influence the infiltration rate are
grain size - coarser sands
     permit rapid infiltration
soil structure - granular
     soils with large aggregates have higher infiltration rates than massive
     soils
organic material - mulches
     protect the surface from raindrop impacts and supply the cementing agents
     for aggregates as the mulch decomposes
depth to hardpan, bedrock or
     other impervious layer - shallow soils allow less water to enter
water content - wet soils
     have slower infiltration rates, partly because swelling clays already hold
     water and have partially filled pores
temperature - warn soils
     have a higher infiltration rate. Frozen soils may be impervious
compaction - reduces pore
     space and slows infiltration
Percolation is common in the more humid regions. Excess water moves through
the soil profile, dissolving soluble ions and carrying them into groundwater.
The water also moves small soil particles (clays and organic colloids) downward
until they lodge in pores or are adsorbed onto ped surfaces. The leached soil
layers lose most of their soluble salts and much of their adsorbed Ca, K, Mg
and Na. Acidic (hydrogen) ions from carbonic acid and other soil acids replace
these, producing acidic soils in humid regions.
Gravitational water partly drains from large pores, and the water is
replaced by large air pockets that greatly reduce water flow rates. Water does
not move appreciably from small water-filled pores into large air-filled pores,
just as a wet sponge does not drip until gravitational water exists at the drip
edge. Stratified soils behave like this, and consequently nearly all stratified
soils hold more water than if the profile were of a single texture.
Unsaturated flow is the movement of water with water potentials lower (more
negative) than about -20 to -33 kPa. In a uniform textured soil, this means
that water moves from a wetter region to a drier one. The water movement may be
in any direction. The rate of flow increases as the water potential gradient
(the difference in potential between wet and dry) increases and as the size of
water-filled pores increases.


===== Weathering_08.html =====


Geo I: Weathering and Soil
Tropical Soils
High rainfall and warm temperatures combine in tropical regions to create
conditions of very high chemical weathering. The relative mobilities of the
major elements released during weathering depends on the prevailing
environmental conditions, but although the precise order may vary with the
weathering regime, the generally agreed sequence of mobility is
Ca2+ >
Mg2+ > Na+ > K+ > Fe2+
> Si4+ > Fe3+ > Al3+
That is, insoluble elements such as Al and Fe are left as residual deposits
after the more mobile elements are leached through the soil horizon. This
selective removal of the more soluble elements may result in the formation of a
hard, generally impermeable crust on the surface or in the upper horizons of
soils, known as a duricrust. Of the insoluble minerals listed above,
haematite, gibbsite (hydrous Aluminum Oxide) and quartz form duricrusts. Ca may also form duricrusts
under favourable circumstances. Mn is not abundant enough to form significant
concretions, but pyrolusite (MnO2) can form and MnO is the common black coating found in fractures such
as the pseudo-fernlike structures called dendrites.
Manganese Oxide Dendrites


===== Weathering_09.html =====


Geo I: Weathering and Soil
Soil Classification
Pedologist (pedon = soil in Greek) => a soil scientist, or is it
someone who studies child development (or maybe its a foot scientist)? 
Soils are complicated and various. Classifying them is not unlike
classifying plants and animals. There are "groups", "subgroups",
"types", etc., ad infinitum. 
Let's start with the main groups: 
Pedalfers
High in Al and Fe (that's the "alfer" part).
  Characteristic of humid regions. Found in prairies and steppes with
  grasslands and forests.
  
Pedocals
High in Ca. Found in desert/semi-arid regions. Scrub
  vegetation.
  
Laterites
Red soils of the tropics. Rich in iron (the red comes from
  hydrated iron oxides). Later is Latin for "brick" or
  "tile". Heavy rainfall has leached out all soluble minerals. Can be
  an economic source of Bauxite (Oxide of Aluminum, and a principal ore).
  
Tundra
The soils of polar climates. Supports mosses, lichens, and
  the like.
  
Next layer of complexity: national soil classification schemes. The US has
one called the "Comprehensive Soil Classification System" with 10
"orders". Canada has their own as well, as eastern Canadian soils are
quite different. 
 
 
 
Iron-rich and aluminium-rich deep weathering profiles are generally termed laterites.
The hard duricrust surfaces of these deposits are called ferricrete and aluminocrete
respectively. Aluminocrete is sometimes called alcrete. Deposits that contain
economically extractable aluminium deposits are called bauxite.
A typical lateritic soil horizon is shown below.
Iron Laterites
Under warm, wet conditions, Fe and Al become concentrated as other minerals
are slowly leached out of the soil. Goethite (FeO.OH) is one of the least soluble
minerals formed during chemical weathering and forms an iron-rich crust, or
ferricrete, at the surface. The lower horizons are rich in kaolinite. Between
the red, iron-rich zone at the surface and the pale, clay-rich zone is a
mottled zone where leaching has been concentrated in certain places. The
sequence of ferricrete - mottled zone - pallid zone is called a laterite.
Ferruginous laterite is widespread and easily recognizable due to its
distinctive red color. Consequently, the term "laterite" is
frequently taken to mean a ferruginous laterite. The essential characteristic
is the enrichment of iron. A well developed iron laterite contains over 50%
ferric oxide and hydroxide. The thickness of some laterites poses a problem of
where the iron came from. As granites contain only in the region of 2% iron,
and basaltic rocks up to 11%,a laterite deposit will require the alteration of
many times its own thickness of original rock to supply the necessary iron. For
a granite, about 20 times the thickness is required, so for a 9 m thick
laterite, some 180 m of in situ alteration would need to be weathered. The
widespread occurrence of 180 m of weathering, concentrated from a deep profile
into a narrow horizon near the surface is not feasible, but some long-range
upward movement of iron may be possible, and a derivation from beyond the site
of formation by lateral movement is widely accepted. In some cases, if there
were no iron enrichment from outside sources, it would imply a loss of 90% of
silica and 81% of alumina from the parental granite. These figure are too great
to be explained by weathering alone and iron enrichment is necessary.
Laterites can also develop in climates other than wet tropical climates,
providing that there has been a stable surface where weathering and leaching
have been prolonged in well-drained sites. Wet tropical climates certainly favor
the development of laterites, however. Ferruginous laterites require seasonal,
rather than continuous rainfall.
Bauxites
Although iron-rich varieties of laterite are the most common, aluminous
laterites, called bauxites, are the most important economically. Weathering of
kaolinite produces gibbsite, Al(OH)3 . The silica is leached from
the surface leaving an aluminous laterite. Gibbsitic bauxite deposits are the
source of most of the world's aluminium. Aluminous laterite form best in humid
tropical to subtropical regions where annual rainfall exceeds 1200-1500 mm.
Aluminocrete is usually pisolitic. Continuous rainfall favours the production
of bauxite deposits, as the monosilicic acid produced during laterite formation
needs to be continuously diluted and leached out so that the silica in solution
is not sufficient to convert aluminium hydroxide (Al(OH)3 =
gibbsite) back to kaolinite.
 
Bauxite
The key to alumina concentration lies in the leaching of most of the other
constituents, including ferric iron and silica. The best developed bauxites are
often associated with one or more of the following:
a humid tropical climate
     with a forest vegetation which promotes organic complexing of iron and its
     removal from the profile
elevated sites where free
     leaching by percolating groundwater is promoted
rocks rich in aluminium (
     and poor in iron) such as phyllites
Silcretes
Monosilicic acid released during laterite formation may be concentrated by
evapotranspiration following lateral movement in groundwater to more arid
climatic zones, producing a siliceous surface crust called silcrete.
Concentration of silica in solution may also cause resilification of gibbsite
to kaolinite, so whereas aluminocrete and ferricrete are residual soils,
silcrete is essentially a secondary siliceous deposit.
Given the high quartz content of most rocks, and the near-absence of quartz
in lateritic soils, developing laterites are a good source of dissolved silica.
The existence of Tertiary silcretes associated with laterite formations of the
same age is in agreement with this suggestion of the mobilisation of silica
from the laterites and redeposition in silcrete.
Silcretes are associated with semi-arid environments, where annual
precipitation drops to below 250 mm, and are generally found to the arid side
of laterite formations. Silica precipitation is also favored by high pH. Up to
a pH of about 9, silica solubility is virtually constant, but increases
markedly above this point. In alkaline environments, such as those found around
ephemeral lake beds in semi-arid and arid regions, pH may vary between 8 and 10
for short distances. Silica in solution moving from a locality above pH 9 to
one below pH 9 will therefore be precipitated.
Calcrete
In arid or semi-arid climates soils lack of moisture reduces leaching and
calcium carbonate accumulates, generally as calcite. These carbonate enriched
soils are termed caliche. Evaporation causes upward movement of soil water and
dissolved salts by capillary action. Thus in areas of low rainfall the caliche
is at or near to the surface. Early stages of caliche formation may produce
either a powdery granular calcite or indurated nodules. Lithification produces
a hard layer called calcrete.


===== Weathering_10.html =====


Geo I: Weathering and Soil
General Factors Controlling Soil Formation
Climate
Humid regions like eastern North
America produce Pedalfers. Water promotes leaching of Fe and Al from
horizon A, which is left with mostly organic material. 
Arid regions like western North America produce
Pedocals. More unstable minerals and fewer organics near surface as
leaching and plant growth is subdued. Calcium and salts precipitate in
horizon B as water evaporates. 
Intense rain in tropics produces extreme weathering
resulting in laterites. 
Parent Material
Basalts will produce soils rich in
iron and iron oxides 
Quatz will yield no clay; clay will yield no sand 
Organic Activity
Micro/Macro organisms digest and
aerate soils. Also contribute to the soil when they die.
Relief and Slope
Steep slopes are eroded faster than
soil producing processes occur. North facing slopes get less sunlight
(and vegetation).
Time
Soil is created at a rate of
2.5 cm/century (on average). That makes it a non-renewable resource.
Leaching will eventually degrade soils, so use it or loose it!


===== Weathering_11.html =====


Geo I: Weathering and Soil
Soil Problems
It takes 100's to 1000's of years to create a few mm of soil. Though it will
inevitably break down, rock is generally very durable stuff! You can still see
evidence of 10,000 year old glacier skid marks in New England. This means it is
essentially a non-renewable resource.
U.S. farmlands loose 3 billion tons of topsoil annually (it is washed into
the oceans). In other parts of the world (Asia and Africa in particular) loss
is so severe that some 22 million acres of farmland are considered beyond
reclamation. 
What's going on?
Erosion!
Erosion is the physical transport of soil and sediment. Some types: 
Water related:
Splash erosion:
Raindrops impacting the ground
loosen particles.
Sheet erosion:
The removal of soil over a surface
in thin layers. A relatively benign form.
Sheet Runoff in Illinois
Rill erosion:
Water tends to collect in
streamlets, which concentrates the erosive energy (kinetic).
Gullying:
An accelerated form. Large slope
gradients cause rapid removal of soil. A major problem in Loess regions. Note
that rills and gullies differ from streams in that they are active only after
significant rainfall.
Wind related:
Abrasion:
wind carried particles impact
stationary objects, causing them to break free (cf. cleaning buildings with
sand blasters).
Deflation:
wind picking up and carrying away
loose rock fragments. A large effect in areas that are not covered by
vegetation (deserts, beaches, bare plowed fields).
A problem in drought conditions (no moisture to hold the soil together).
Deflation Basins in New Mexico
Extreme example I:
The Dust Bowl in Oklahoma and Texas
in the 1930s. More that 1 meter of soil removed in a few years!
Extreme example II:
The Qattara Depression in western
Egypt: now 100 m below sea level! Most of this due to removal of soil by wind.
Deflation is limited by (1) reaching bedrock or (2) hitting
the water table. Fortunately, when the water table gets close to the surface,
plant life can prosper, which slows down the deflation. So it is somewhat
self-regulating.
Some other
problems:
Expansive soils:
Some clays expand by up to 10% when wet (e.g., smectite). Obviously a
problem for foundations. A big problem in east Texas. 
 
Permafrost:
A condition where some part of the ground fails to get above freezing
temperatures. (The battle between atmospheric and earth energy sources is
"won" by the cold atmosphere). This leads to frozen soil with
thicknesses up to 1500 m! 
The problem with permafrost is: it's not really "perma" 
 
Seasonal thawing leads to
     pockets of liquid water called "talik". These can erupt to the
     surface, forming 30-50 m high mounds called "pingos" which can
     erode to make basins.
Pingos in Canada
People building on permafrost
     inevitably melt it, causing the structures to sink. This is why the
     Alaskan oil pipeline is elevated, despite resistance from oil companies.
On the other hand, Weathering can Concentrate Mineral
Resources.
Examples: 
Diamonds at the top of Kimberlite Pipes
Deposits of Iron, Manganese, nickel, phosphate,
tin, gold. 
These are what are left over after the host body
weathered away. 



