===== minerals_01.html =====


GeoI Lecture Notes Minerals: The building blocks of Rocks
Geo I
Minerals
The building blocks of Rocks
We now begin to discuss the nature of the stuff the Earth (and other
planets) is made of. Let's start at the most elementary level and work
our way up. The line between energy and particle is vague, but for this
course we will not worry about phenomena at the subatomic level.
So, let's review a bit about ATOMS and ELEMENTS.
Definitions:
ELEMENT
The most fundamental substance into which matter can be separated by chemical
means. There are 104 of these we know about, 88 of which occur naturally.
ATOM
The smallest individual particle that retains all the properties of a given
element.


===== minerals_02.html =====


GeoI Lecture Notes Minerals: The building blocks of Rocks
ATOMIC STRUCTURE
Atoms are composed of PROTONS, NEUTRONS, and ELECTRONS.
PROTONS and NEUTRONS combine to form the nucleus.
ELECTRONS orbit about the nucleus.
Protons are positively charged, electrons negatively charged. Neutrons
have no charge.
A Proton is 1832 x more massive than an electron
A Neutron is 1833 x more massive than an electron
Thus, nearly all the mass of any atom resides in the nucleus.
Note that 1 amu (atomic mass unit) = 1.660551 x 10-24g.  It is defined
so that 12C has a mass of exactly 12 amu.


===== minerals_03.html =====


GeoI Lecture Notes Minerals: The building blocks of Rocks
The most important chemical characteristics of an atom (i.e., what makes
it a certain "element") is controlled by the number of protons in the nucleus.
This number is called the element's ATOMIC NUMBER.
However, the same element can have different numbers of neutrons. These
variations are call ISOTOPES.
All elements have at least two isotopes.  Most have many more .
The atomic mass unit that appears in the periodic table is an average over isotopic
abundances for that element.
Most elements have a single isotope that is stable, while the others
decay (i.e. they loose part of the nucleus to become a different isotope
or a different element). The decay of isotopes is a powerful tool in geologic
dating.
It is the decay (radioactivity) of atoms that is responsible for most
of the heat that is generated inside the Earth.
The sum of protons and neutrons in the nucleus is called the MASS
NUMBER.
There are four types of elements based upon their properties:
metals 
nonmetals 
metalloids 
noble gases 
A metal is an element that is a good conductor of heat and
electricity. All metals are solid at room temperature except for
mercury, which is a liquid. Metals are found on the left side of the
periodic table. In addition to being good conductors of heat and
electricity, metals have the following properties:
luster (they are shiny) 
ductile (they can be drawn out into a thin wire) 
malleable (they can be hammered or rolled into thin sheets, like aluminum foil) 
good reflectors of heat and light 
high tensile strength (they resist breaking when pulled) 
A nonmetal is an element that is a poor conductor (insulator) of heat and
electricity.  At room temperature, some are gases, like oxygen, chlorine,
and nitrogen, and one is a liquid, bromine. Solid nonmetals, like
carbon, sulfur, and phosphorus are not malleable nor ductile, but
instead are brittle and break easily. Nonmetals are generally found on
the right side of the periodic table.
Metalloids are elements that have some properties characteristic of
metals and others characteristic of nonmetals. All metalloids are
solids under ordinary conditions. Some metalloids, like arsenic and
antimony, look like lustrous metals. All metalloids are semiconductors.
Semiconductors are those elements which conduct electricity better than
nonmetals, but not as good as metals. Semiconductors, like silicon, are
being used in everyday devices like digital watches, handheld
calculators, and computers.
Noble gases are all gases at room temperature and are highly
unreactive. They are located at the far right of the periodic table in
Group 18. These gases are helium, argon, krypton, xenon, and radon.


===== minerals_04.html =====


GeoI Lecture Notes Minerals: The building blocks of Rocks
About Electrons
In order to understand the chemistry of elements (how they react with one another)
the most important bit to understand how their electons behave.  A good chemist knows
how to "think like an electron".
Electrons orbit the nucleus in certain "shells", each of which is capable
of accommodating a particular number of electrons. For example:
Shell #
# Electrons
1
2
2
8
3
18
4
32
Some details:
Most of this stuff was worked out by Erwin Schrdinger, who deduced
the mathematical relationships to calculate the energies of the
electrons based on the orbitals that electrons inhabit. 
To describe the
energy for each electron, he distinguished each individual
electron from the others using a set of parameters called quantum
numbers.
There are four different quantum numbers that are defined for each electron:
principle quantum number, n = 1,2,3, ...
	
defines the principle energy levels of an atom
orbital quantum number, l = 0, 1, ... , n-1
	
describes the shape of the orbital the electron is in
magnetic quantum number, m = -l, ... -1, 0, 1, ... , +l
	
describes the direction in which the orbital points
spin quantum number, s = +1/2 or -1/2
	
defines which particular electron in an orbital you have
The value of the orbital quantum number also has a letter associated with it; the shape of the orbital is associated with that letter:
l = 0 s orbital (sphere shaped)
l = 1 p orbital (propeller shaped)
l = 2 d orbital (daisy shaped)
l = 3 f orbital (f? shaped)
Each unique orbital, which is described by unique values of n, l, and m
in a given atom, can contain up to two electrons. So we need a method
to differentiate between those two electrons in each orbital; for this
we use the spin quantum number s. The first electron in the orbital has
a value of s = +1/2 and the second electron in the orbital has a value
of s = -1/2.
The Pauli Exclusion Principle states that no two electrons can have the
exact same set of four quantum numbers. That is, if two electrons are
in the same orbital (and thus have identical values of n, l, and m),
they must differ in the value of the spin quantum number s. One must
have s=+1/2 and the other s=-1/2.
The Aufbau Principle states that an electron will occupy the lowest energy orbital that can receive it.
This allows us to figure out where electons will be, but in general this is
a difficult calculation.  A good mneomnic device is the following (but note it doesn't
work in every instance):
Valence electrons are the electrons in the highest principle energy
level and they determine many important properties of an atom.
Atoms want to be more stable and be lower in energy. The Octet Rule
describes what happens in order for an atom to become stable: atoms
will gain, lose, or share electrons so that they have a complete octet
in their valence shell (note that means that the s and p subshells are full). 
The reason why the octet rule works is based on
the idea that atoms are lower in energy and more stable when they have
a complete octet in their valence shell. Since only the noble gases
have full s and p subshells in their outer shells, 
that leaves a lot of atoms without stability.
In order to become stable and have a full valence shell, atoms form
chemical bonds with other atoms.
There are three basic types of bonds: ionic bonds, covalent bonds, and
metallic bonds. The type of chemical bond that arises between two atoms
depends on the difference in the ability of an atom to retain or
attract an electron (a property also known as "electronegativity")
between the two atoms.
Atoms with excess positive or negative charges are called IONS.
An atom that gives up electrons (and thus has a net + charge) is called
a CATION
An atom that takes electrons (and thus has a net - charge) is called
an ANION
Sometimes several atoms join together to make an ion.  These are called
Polyatomic Ions. 
An ionic bond is a chemical bond resulting from electrostatic
attraction between positive and negative ions. In ionic bond, electrons
are totally transferred from one atom and given to another atom,
creating positively charged cations and negatively charged anions. Each
cation and anion has lost or gained electrons so that they have
complete valence-shell octets; these ions are then held together by the
electrostatic force between positive and negative charges. Ionic bonds
most often occur between metal atoms (which have small
electronegativities and easily lose electrons) and nonmetal atoms
(which have large electronegativities and easily gain electrons).
A covalent bond is a chemical bond resulting from the sharing of
electrons between two atoms. Atoms that share electrons both believe
that they "own" the electrons that they are sharing. In this way, each
atom believes that they have a complete octet.  The electrons are
considered to be part of both atoms and the attractive force of each
nucleus for the pair of electrons between the atoms holds the atoms
together. Covalent bonds usually occur between two nonmetal atoms.
Note that some bonds result in a compound being polarized meaning that they
are not electrically neutral.  Water, for example, is negative on the oxygen
end, and positive on the hydrogen end.  The
small hydrogens also allow them to pack together and make liquid water denser than solid
water (ice).
For the same reason, water is a very good solvent 
(i.e., it can dissolve things) and is good at cleaning dirt off your hands.  The
small hydrogens also allow them to pack together and make liquid water denser than solid
water (ice).
BTW:  Polar compounds dissolve other polor compounds, but for non-polar compounds
you need another non-polor solvent.  To get grease and oil off your hands, a "handy"
compound  sodium stearate:
which is a common soap.  The non-polar end grads the oil and grease, the polar end
grabs the water.
A metallic bond is a chemical bond resulting from the attraction
between positive ions and surrounding mobile electrons. A metallic bond
is a special type of nonpolar covalent bond that exists only between
metal atoms.
The mobile electrons in a metallic bond are referred to as an "electron
sea". You can imagine the positively charged nuclei as "islands" that
exist within this sea of electrons. The electrons are delocalized,
which means that they do not belong to any particular ion, and are free
to move around to whichever ion they please. The electrons are
therefore able to flow, much like the sea does. The metallic bond
consists of all of the valence electrons being shared by all of the
atoms.
Compounds made of Carbon and Hydrogen (possibly with O and N) are called
ORGANIC. Everything else, is thus INORGANIC.
Most of the Earth is made of inorganic compounds.


===== minerals_05.html =====


GeoI Lecture Notes Minerals: The building blocks of Rocks
Now here is where things get a bit complicated.
In addition to "composition", many compounds (solid ones, anyway)
have "structure".  For example, NaCl looks like this:
The molecules tend to be aligned in a very specific way, although one
compound may have several stable structures (these are called "polymorphs").
It doesn't do to simply identify a substance by the atoms that make
it up; there has to be some structural identification as well.
This is where Minerals come in.
Here's a definition:
Mineral:
Any naturally formed, solid, chemical substance having a definite chemical
composition and a characteristic crystal structure.
That just about gets it.


===== minerals_06.html =====


GeoI Lecture Notes Minerals: The building blocks of Rocks
Example of a polymorph:

SiO2 can be Quartz, Cristobalite, Tridymite, Coesite, or
Stishovite.
Quartz
Stishovite
Compounds without structure are called "amorphous" and are not minerals
(examples: resins, glasses).
A note on how structures form:
A lot of what controls how solids are put together depends on the size
of the ions involved. In a sense, it's just like stacking up boxes of different
sizes; certain optimal configurations will emerge.
Note that the size of an ion (quantified by the ionic radius) will in general
be different from the size of the atom (quantified by the atomic radius).  Size
is governed by:
nuclear charge effect:  more protons in a nucleus draw electrons in closer
radius effect: outer shells of electrons are farther away from the protrons and are less attracted.
shielding effect:  inner shell electrons neutralize the charge from the nucleus 
sublevel effect: the tendency of atoms to gain or loose electrons to obey the octet rule.
ATOMIC RADIUS VS ATOMIC NUMBER
IONIC RADIUS VS ATOMIC NUMBER
In general, anions (extra electrons) are bigger than cations, so a structure
often depends on how the anions are packed together.
Cations of the same size often displace or substitute for each other.
For example Fe (0.83 nm) and Mg (0.78 nm).


===== minerals_07.html =====


GeoI Lecture Notes Minerals: The building blocks of Rocks
So many minerals, so little time.
Although there are 88 naturally occurring elements, only a very few
are abundant in the crust. The most important of these are Oxygen, Silicon,
Aluminum, Iron, Calcium, Magnesium, Sodium, and Potassium, Titanium, Hydrogen,
Manganese, and Phosphorus. Together these 12 make up 99% of the crust.
Two of these (O and Si) account for 72%. Similarly, about 20 minerals
make up > 95% of the crust.
Because Oxygen is so abundant, almost all the important minerals contain
it, either as Oxides (with a O-2 attached) or with polyatomic ions
like
 (SiO4)-4
Silicates
 (SO4)-2
Sulfates
 (PO4)-2
Phosphates
 (CO3)-2
Carbonates


===== minerals_08.html =====


GeoI Lecture Notes Minerals: The building blocks of Rocks
But by far the most important of these is the
SILICATES (SiO4)-4.
The silicate anion has the shape of a tetrahedra, with the big O's in
the corners and the relatively tiny Si in the middle.
All the variety of the Silicates depends mostly on how these tetrahedra
stack together.
Here's what can happen:
Individual tetrahedra are separate from one another, and are linked by
other cations
Adjacent tetrahedra can share an O. In this way, the tetrahedra can join
together in long chains called POLYMERS.
We divide the Silicate Class of minerals into 6 subclasses based on the
arrangement of the silica tetrahedra:
SubclassStructureImportant Mineral Groups
NesosilicatesSingle TetrahedronsOlivineGarnet
SorosilicatesDouble TetrahedronsEpidote
InosilicatesSingle and Double ChainsPyroxene (single)Amphibole (double)
CyclosilicatesRingsTourmaline
PhyllosilicatesSheetsMicaClay
TectosilicatesFrameworkQuartzFeldsparFeldspathoid
Of these, the Sorosilicates are quite rare and the Cyclosilicates are somewhat less important than
the others, so we won't discuss these further in this lecture (they make nice gemstones, however).


===== minerals_09.html =====


GeoI Lecture Notes Minerals: The building blocks of Rocks
The Nesosilicates
This subclass includes all silicates where the tetrahedrons are unbonded to
other tetrahedrons. Nesosilicates have a structure that produces stronger bonds
and a closer packing of ions and therefore a higher density, index of
refraction and hardness than chemically similar silicates in other subclasses.
Consequently, There are more gemstones in the nesosilicates than in any other
silicate subclass.
Two very important mineral groups (because they are so abundant) in this
category are OLIVINE and GARNET.
OLIVINE has Mg and Fe as cations. Formula is (Mg, Fe)2SiO4.
Olivine is greenish in color (hence the name).
GARNET is a bit more complicated. Its formula is A3B2(SiO4)3
where
A = Mg+2, Fe+2, Ca+2, and/or Mn+2
B = Al+3, and or Fe+3
Garnet and Olivine are the most important minerals in the upper mantle.
OLIVINE STRUCTURE
The Olivine Group:
Fayalite* (Iron Silicate) 
Forsterite* (Magnesium Silicate) 
Laihunite (Iron Silicate) 
Liebenbergite (Nickel Magnesium Silicate) 
Olivine* (Magnesium Iron Silicate ) 
Tephroite (Manganese Silicate)
OLIVINE
The Garnet Group: 
Almandine* (Iron Aluminum Silicate) 
Andradite (Calcium Iron Silicate) 
Grossular (Calcium Aluminum Silicate) 
Pyrope* (Magnesium Aluminum Silicate) 
Spessartine (Manganese Aluminum Silicate) 
Uvarovite (Calcium Chromium Silicate) 
GARNET


===== minerals_10.html =====


GeoI Lecture Notes Minerals: The building blocks of Rocks
The Inosilicates
 This subclass contains two distinct groups: the single chain and double chain
silicates. 
Single Chains
In the single chain group the tetrahedrons share two oxygens with two
other tetrahedrons and form a seemingly endless chain. The ratio of silicon to
oxygen is thus 1:3. The tetrahedrons alternate to the left and then to the right
along the line formed by the linked oxygens although more complex chains seem to
spiral. In cross section the chain forms a trapezium and this shape produces the
angles between the crystal faces and cleavage directions.
The most important group in the single chain class are the:
PYROXENES: Polymerization along a single chain. Cations bind one
chain to another.
Formula: AB(SiO3)2
A and B = Mg+2, Fe+2, Ca+2, and/or Mn+2
PYROXENE (Augite)
The Pyroxene Group:
Aegirine (Sodium Iron Silicate) 
Augite* (Calcium Sodium Magnesium Aluminum Iron Titanium Silicate) 
Diopside (Calcium Magnesium Silicate) 
Enstatite (Magnesium Silicate) 
Hedenbergite (Calcium Iron Silicate) 
Hypersthene (Magnesium Iron Silicate) 
Jadeite (Sodium Aluminum Iron Silicate) 
Spodumene (Lithium Aluminum Silicate) 
Double Chains
In the double chain group, two single chains lie side by side so that all the
right sided tetrahedrons of the left chain are linked by an oxygen to the left
sided tetrahedrons of the right chain. The extra shared oxygen for every four
silicons reduces the ratio of silicons to oxygen to 4:11. The double chain looks
like a chain of six sided rings. The cross section is similar in the double
chains to that of the single chains except the trapezium
is longer in the double chains. This difference produces a difference in 
characteristic angles.
The most important group in the double chain class are the:
AMPHIBOLES: Polymerization along "double chains"; really just two
pyroxene chains that join together by sharing an extra O.
Formula: A2B5(Si4O11)2(OH)2
(Whew!)
A = Mg+2,Ca+2
B = Mg+2, Fe+2
Note that Amphibole is hydrated (with the OH on it).
Amphibole (Hornblende)
The Amphibole Group:
Actinolite (Calcium Magnesium Iron Silicate Hydroxide) 
Anthophyllite (Magnesium Iron Silicate Hydroxide) 
Cummingtonite (Iron Magnesium Silicate Hydroxide) 
Edenite (Sodium Calcium Magnesium Iron Aluminum Silicate Hydroxide) 
Hornblende* (Calcium Sodium Magnesium Iron Aluminum Silicate Hydroxide) 
Riebeckite (Sodium Iron Silicate Hydroxide) 
Tremolite (Calcium Magnesium Iron Silicate Hydroxide) 
Because the O bonds are much stronger than the cation bonds, these types of
minerals exhibit planes of weakness, or "cleavage", along which they can be
broken and form very flat surfaces. The cleavage of the two groups occurs between
chains and does not break the chains thus producing prismatic cleavage.
Pyroxene Cleavage
Amphibole Cleavage


===== minerals_11.html =====


GeoI Lecture Notes Minerals: The building blocks of Rocks
The Phyllosilicates
In this subclass, chains of tetrahedra are linked by shared oxygens to other chains in a
two dimensional plane that produces a sheet-like structure. The silicon to oxygen ratio
is generally 1:2.5 (or 2:5) because only one oxygen is exclusively bonded to the silicon
and the other three are half shared (1.5) to other silicons. The typical crystal habit of
this subclass is therefore flat, platy, book-like and displays good basal cleavage.
Typically, the sheets are then connected to each other by layers of cations. These cation
layers are weakly bonded and often have water molecules and other neutral atoms or
molecules trapped between the sheets. This explains why this subclass produces very soft
minerals such as talc, which is used in talcum powder. Some members of this subclass have
the sheets rolled into tubes that produce fibers as in asbestos serpentine. 
Important mineral groups are: CLAYS and MICAS
These minerals show a characteristic "flaking". Formulas are complicated,
but involve
(Mg,Fe,K)(Si,Al)O(OH)
BIOTITE
MUSCOVITE CLEAVAGE
The Clay Group:
The Chlorite Group: 
Chlorite* (Iron Magnesium Aluminum Silicate Hydroxide) 
Clinochlore (Iron Magnesium Aluminum Silicate Hydroxide) 
Cookeite (Lithium Aluminum Silicate Hydroxide) 
Kaolinite* (Aluminum Silicate Hydroxide)
Pyrophyllite (Aluminum Silicate Hydroxide) 
Talc* (Magnesium Silicate Hydroxide) 
The Mica Group:
Biotite* (Potassium Iron Magnesium Aluminum Silicate Hydroxide Fluoride) 
Lepidolite (Potassium Lithium Aluminum Silicate Hydroxide Fluoride) 
Muscovite* (Potassium Aluminum Silicate Hydroxide Fluoride) 
Phlogopite* (Potassium Magnesium Aluminum Silicate Hydroxide Fluoride) 
Zinnwaldite (Potassium Lithium Aluminum Silicate Hydroxide Fluoride) 


===== minerals_12.html =====


GeoI Lecture Notes Minerals: The building blocks of Rocks
Finally, we have
The Tectosilicates
This subclass is often called the "Framework Silicates" because its structure
is composed of interconnected tetrahedra going outward in all directions
forming an intricate 3D framework analogous to the framework of a large building.
In this subclass all the oxygens are shared with other tetrahedrons giving a
silicon to oxygen ratio of 1:2.
These are among the most common minerals around (i.e., the ones you'll most
likely run into.  The most important groups are QUARTZ and FELDSPARS.
QUARTZ: Is pure SiO2 and forms clear, 6-sided crystals.
However, some quartz is very fine grained and the 6-sided guys are hard
to see (e.g., various chalcedony - agate, flint and jasper). Others include
impurities that lend brilliant colors (e.g., amethyst, citrine). Quartz
is very abundant in upper continental crust.
Quartz Crystals
Quartz Varieties: Milky, Rock Crystal, Rose Quartz
Member of the Quartz Group:
Coesite 
Cristobalite 
Quartz*
Stishovite
Tridymite 
FELDSPARS (Field minerals); also very common in the crust.
Feldspar differs from Quarts in that Al may substitute for Si (hence
"sialic"), although and extra cation is required to balance the charge
(Al+3 instead of Si+4). Typically this extra cation
is:
K
In which case we have "Potassium Feldspar" (a.k.a. K-spar). Polymorphs
are Orthoclase, Microcline, Sanadine.
Na
In which case we have "Albite"
Ca
In which case we have "Anorthite".
The general term for the Na and Ca bearing Feldspar is PLAGIOCLASE.
Ca and Na are about the same size, and substitute for each other in a continuous
series. (The substitution is actually Na + Si for Ca + Al to balance the
charge.)  At high enough temperatures, there is a subsitutions between Na and
K, producing the ALKALI FELDSPARS.
Orthoclase Feldspar
Plagioclase Feldspar
Because feldspar types depend on the amount and type of cation involved, we
summarize the compositional types in a triangular plot.  These types of plots
are used very often in Geology.  Here's an example of
one and how to read it:
Solid Solution - Plagioclase
The Na+ and Ca2+ ions are of a similar size, whereas the K+ ion is
somewhat larger. Thus there is a continuous solid solution between the
two end members of the plagioclase series, with a coupled substitution
of (NaSi)5+ for (CaAl)5+. Although the solid solution is continuous,
the following mineral names have been assigned according to the
percentage of anorthite
Albite - An 0-10 
Oligoclase - An 10-30 
Andesine - An 30-50 
Labradorite - An 50-70 
Bytownite - An 70-90 
Anorthite - An 90-100 
An andesine plagioclase where the cation sites are filled by 65% Na and
35% Ca would have the formula of Na0.65Ca0.35Al1.35Si2.65O8
Solid Solution - Alkali feldspars
At high temperatures, there is sufficient movement in the crystal
lattice to allow the incorporation of the large K cation, and there is
a continuous solid solution betwen the Na and K end members. Names
assigned to the series are
Albite >90% Na 
Anorthoclase 90-50% Na 
Sanidine 50-0% Na 
At lower temperatures, the sodic and potassic components unmix from
each other and form separate feldspar structures, which are intimately
intergrown, rather than a solid solution. The result is an intergrowth
of thin "stringers" of albite within an orthoclase host, which is
termed "Perthite". The opposite arrangement, of orthoclase stringers in
an albite host, is called antiperthite, but is much rarer, as the Na
cation is smaller and more mobile and forms the albite stringers more
readily.
Summary of Members of the Feldspar Group:
The plagioclase feldspars:
Albite (Sodium aluminum silicate) 
Oligoclase (Sodium calcium aluminum silicate) 
Andesine (Sodium calcium aluminum silicate) 
Labradorite (Calcium sodium aluminum silicate) 
Bytownite (Calcium sodium aluminum silicate) 
Anorthite (Calcium aluminum silicate) 
The K-feldspars or alkali felspars:
Microcline (Potassium aluminum silicate) 
Sanidine (Potassium sodium aluminum silicate) 
Orthoclase (Potassium aluminum silicate) 
Finally, there is a kind of oddball group called the Feldspathoids.  As
the name suggests, they are kind of like Feldspars, but have much more Al
than normal Feldspars.  The aluminum to silicon ratio is nearly 1:1 in
most of the feldspathoids but is closer to 1:3 in most of the feldspars.  One
might gather that these minerals formed in an environment deficient in silica
and would have become Feldspars had more silica been present.
Members of the Feldspathoid Group:
Cancrinite (Sodium Calcium Aluminum Silicate Carbonate) 
Lazurite (Sodium Calcium Aluminum Silicate Sulfate Sulfide Chloride) 
Leucite (Potassium Aluminum Silicate) 
Nepheline* (Sodium Potassium Aluminum Silicate) 
Sodalite (Sodium Aluminum Silicate Chloride) 


===== minerals_13.html =====


GeoI Lecture Notes Minerals: The building blocks of Rocks
A few other mineral groups of major interest:
Sulfides
Commercially important and exploited as metal ores since ancient times. Valued by the Roman legions.
Examples: Pyrite (FeS2), Galena (PbS), Sphalerite (ZnS)
Pyrite (FeS2)
Galena (PbS)
Sphalerite (ZnS)
Carbonates
The carbonates are common constituents of the earth's near-surface crust.  The
basic anionic (negatively charged) unit of this class consists of a triangle
with a carbon atom at the center and an oxygen atom at each corner. This
trigonal symmetry is usually expressed macroscopically. 
Typical carbonates are transparent, lightly colored with a white streak,
average to above average density, soft with good to perfect cleavage, soluble
to at least some degree in acidic solutions, and tend to originate in
sedimentary and oxidizing environments with the exception of carbonatite
igneous intrusions. Most of these common characteristics are due to the common
chemistry the group shares.  Members that diverge from the norm do so because
of the effects of metal cations such as lead, copper, manganese and iron.
The most important carbonate groups are the Aragonites, the Calcites and
the Dolomites.
Aragonites and Calcites both have the formula ACO3 where A is a +2 metal
cation, but slightly different structures.   Aragonite cations (Calcium, barium, lead and/or
strontium)) are smaller than Ca (or Ca itself) while the Calcite cations (calcium, cobalt, iron,
magnesium, zinc, cadmium, manganese and/or nickel) are larger than Ca (or Ca itself).  Note that
this means that CaCO3 can have either an Aragonite or Calcite structure (in fact,
Calcite and Aragonite are also the names of most abundant minerals in these groups, both of which
are CaCO3).
Members of the Calcite Group:
Calcite* (CaCO3)
Gaspeite ({Ni, Mg, Fe}CO3) 
Magnesite (MgCO3) 
Otavite (CdCO3) 
Rhodochrosite (MnCO3) 
Siderite (FeCO3) 
Smithsonite (ZnCO3) 
Sphaerocobaltite (CoCO3) 
Members of the Aragonite Group:
Aragonite* (CaCO3) 
Cerussite (PbCO3) 
Strontianite (SrCO3) 
Witherite (BaCO3)
Dolomites have the same structure as Calcites but have two cations
(AB(CO3)2).  While Calcites alternate layers between the carbonate
and the cation, Dolomites also alternate cations.  
The most common mineral in the Dolomite group is (by far) Dolomite. The other members are very rare.
The reason is tied to the closeness in radius of the A and B ions.
In Dolomite the A and B ions are calcium and magnesium which have the largest ionic radius
differential of the group (approximately 33%). If the A and B ions are close in radius, then they
tend to not segregate as easily into the separate A and B layers, which is required to form this
structure and therefore these minerals. 
Members of the Dolomite Group:
Ankerite Ca(Fe, Mg, Mn)(CO3)2 
Benstonite (Ba, Sr)6(Ca, Mn)6Mg(CO3)13 
Dolomite* CaMg(CO3)2 
Huntite CaMg3(CO3)4 
Kutnohorite Ca(Mn, Mg, Fe)(CO3)2 
Minrecordite CaZn(CO3)2 
Norsethite BaMg(CO3)2 
All that said, the most important carbonates are the Calcium Caronates (Calcite and
Aragonite) and those where Iron or Magnesium substitutes for Calcium (Dolomite).  These
minerals are important in marine environments and are often formed
by deposits of shells. Limestone is essentially calcite.
Calcite 
Limestone
Dolomite
Phosphates
The Phosphates have a basic chemical unit of tetrahedral (PO4) groups with a negative
three (-3) charge.  The basic chemical unit can be combined with metal ions on a one to one ratio or
usually in more complex combinations with other ions such as hydroxide groups (OH), uranyl groups
(UO2), a halogen or even water molecules. The typical phosphate is vitreous to dull, often strongly
colored, above average in density, average in hardness (4-7) and low in index of refraction unless
ions such as lead are present.  Phosphates generally are important as fertilizers, and in the
construction of bones and teeth. Appropriately, a major group of  phosphates is called APATITE. (or
as Julia Child would say: "Bone Apatite").
Apatite comes in three varities:
Chlorapatite (Calcium Phosphate Chloride; Ca5(PO4)3Cl)
Fluorapatite (Calcium Phosphate Fluoride; Ca5(PO4)3F)
Hydroxylapatite (Calcium Phosphate Hydroxide; Ca5(PO4)3OH )
APATITE 


===== mineral.id_01.html =====


GeoI Lecture Notes: Mineral Identification
Geo I/Planet Earth I
Mineral Identification
A Rose Quartz by any other name still wouldn't smell
In general, positive identification of minerals can require a lot of
work and expensive equipment. However, for many minerals there are a number
of simple tests of physical properties that are quite accurate for determining
a certain mineral type. These physical properties are:
Color
just like it sounds
Streak
the color of pulverized mineral
Luster
The way the mineral reflects light
Hardness
Scratch or be scratched.
Crystal Form
The angles between faces
Cleavage
The ways in which you can cleanly break the mineral
Fracture
What happens when you don't have a clean break


===== mineral.id_02.html =====


GeoI Lecture Notes: Mineral Identification
Let's look at these a bit in detail:
Color

Color is about the easiest thing to notice, but is not always reliable.
Generally speaking, however, ferromags like olivine, augite (pyroxene),
hornblende (amphibole), and biotite tend to be dark colored and mostly
green or black, while Sialic minerals like feldspars and quartz tend to
be lighter colored (white or pink).  Generally, though, color is often
due to trace elements in a mineral.

Streak

Streak is the color of the mineral when pulverized, usually done by
scraping it on a porcelain plate. The streak is often more diagnostic than
the color (minerals tend to have the same streak even if they have different
colors), but of course the mineral must not be harder than the streak plate!
Pyrite Streak (Brown)
Luster

This is the quality and intensity of reflected light. There are a number
of qualitative classes of luster:
Metallic

Very Shiny
Examples: Galena, pyrite
Chalcopyrite and Pyrite
Nonmetallic (more common)

glassy or vitreous: kind of a glazed appearance; characteristic
of many silicate minerals
Examples: Muscovite
Muscovite
earthy or dull: like unglazed pottery; many clay minerals have
this characteristic
Example: Kaolinite
Kaolinite
resinous: like resin or tree sap
Example: Sphalerite
Sphalerite
pearly: Like the inside of a clam shell
Example: talc
Talc



===== mineral.id_03.html =====


GeoI Lecture Notes: Mineral Identification
Hardness

Hard things scratch things that are not as hard. There is a quantitative
scale of hardness based on real physics called the Knoop scale, but we
usually use the scale invented by Frederich Mohs, called (naturally enough)
Mohs Hardness Scale:

1
Talc
2
Gypsum
3
Calcite
4
Flourite
5
Apatite
6
Orthoclase (Potassium Feldspar)
7
Quartz
8
Topaz or Beryl
9
Corundum
10
Diamond

Hardness of common objects:

Fingernail
2 - 2.5
Copper Coin
3.5
Steel Knife
5-6
Glass
5-5.5
Streak Plate
6.5-7
Examples:
Fingernail Scratching Talc
Penny Scratching Gypsum
Corundum Scratching Quartz
Comparison of the Knoop Scale with Mohs Scale:
Moe Developing his Hardness Scale.


===== mineral.id_04.html =====


GeoI Lecture Notes: Mineral Identification
Cleavage

Many crystals have characteristic planes of weakness along which the
easily may be broken. What is important to note are:
1. Number of cleavage directions
2. The angles between these directions.
A cleavage plane tends to be a good light reflector, and therefore appears
shiny.
Examples:
1 plane
Micas
2 Planes at right angles
feldspars
2 Planes not at right angles
Hornblende (amphibole)
3 Planes at right angles (cubic)
Salt (halite), galena
3 Planes not at right angles (rhombohedral)
Calcite
4 Planes (octahedral: 8 faces)
Flourite
6 Planes (dodecahedral: 12 faces)
Sphalerite
When a mineral cleaves, it often exhibits many cleavage surfaces, but
most of these are generally parallel to one another. A hundred cleavage
surfaces parallel to one another all define a single direction of
cleavage, because all of them are parallel to the same zone of bond
weakness. It is the number of directions of cleavage that we record,
along with the angles between them. Minerals with two or more cleavage
directions generally have a "stair-step" appearance when viewed with a
magnifying glass. A mineral with two directions of cleavage may indeed
be broken in some other direction-by irregular fracture. Thus, a single
specimen may exhibit smooth cleavage planes in some directions, and
irregular breakage surfaces in others. The more breakage surfaces we
can see, the more clues we have to the mineral's internal structure.
It may be difficult for the beginner to distinguish between cleavage
and crystal faces. After all, both are smooth, planar surfaces. Two
hints will help make the distinction easy. (1) If a mineral's outer
surface shows a tarnish or alteration, the crystal faces will be
tarnished or dull; if cleavage planes are present, they are usually
recently made and will be fresher and less altered. (2) If many
surfaces are present parallel to one another, they are most likely
cleavage surfaces.
Examples of Cleavage


===== mineral.id_05.html =====


GeoI Lecture Notes: Mineral Identification
Fracture

Crystals that don't have a simple cleavage plane will break along a
rough, irregular surface that does not reflect light well.
Example: Quartz, which shows concoidal (coke bottle) fracture.

Crystal Form:

If you can get a sample of a single crystal with well developed crystal
faces, the number and orientation of faces can give very good clues about
what kind of mineral it is because the form is a reflection of the underlying
atomic structure. The problem is that few minerals do this, because they
must compete for space while growing.

Examples:
Quartz
hexagonal with pyramid like prisms on top
Pyrite
Cubes
Calcite
Rhombohedrons


===== mineral.id_06.html =====


GeoI Lecture Notes: Mineral Identification
Other properties

Reactions with acid:

Calcite bubbles when you drop HCL on it. It's really the only useful
test of its type but calcite is so common it is commonly used.
Double Refraction:

A unique property of some calcite crystals
Magnetism

A characteristic of Magnetite
Specific Gravity or Density

Most rock forming minerals are between 2.6 and 3.4
Metallic minerals are significantly denser (5-8)
Tenacity

Brittle vs flexible minerals
Quartz shatters, micas bend, gold and copper are highly malleable.
Fractured Quartz
Striations

Very thin, parallel grooves that are useful in distinguishing Plagioclase
(with) from Kspar (without)
They are seen on only one of the two sets of cleavages.
Sodium Plagioclase (Albite) showing Striations
NB: Among feldspars, Kspar (orthoclase) often is pink; plagioclase is usually white to gray colored.

Taste

Good for Halite, but generally you don't want to chew on unidentified objects.  Some
rocks are toxic!  The best way to do this is to wet your finger to collect a small sample.
Smell

Clays tend to smell "earthy" when moist
Hire a Petrologist!

A good last resort.


===== mineral.id_07.html =====


GeoI Lecture Notes: Mineral Identification
Bonus Page: A Bit More About Quartz
Quartz is one of the most abundant minerals in the crust of the Earth and is 
common in soils and rocks, and even in atmospheric dust. It is hard and tough, so 
it survives well on the Earth's surface, and it occurs in a wide variety of colors 
and forms.
Commonly encountered varieties of 
quartz include well-formed crystals (colorless rock crystal quartz, violet amethyst, 
and gray to black smoky quartz are common in rock shops and collections but not in 
your backyard), coarsely crystalline types (pinkish rose quartz and the abundant 
white milky quartz), and extremely fine-grained (microcrystalline) 
varieties of many colors (varicolored banded agate and onyx, brown to gray 
translucent chalcedony, red jasper white to gray chert, and black flint).
Milky, Crystalline, and Rose Quartz
Quartz has many uses. It is a major constituent in glass, concrete, mortar, and in 
some kinds of building stones. Quartz watches keep good time, because a quartz 
crystal, when hooked to the watch battery, vibrates at a constant rate. Some 
varieties of quartz are used in jewelry, and quartz crystals have ceremonial 
significance in some religious practices.
Chalcedony
Microcrystalline Quartz is also known as Chalcedony. Collectors
and gem dealers call each variety by its particular name. There are
hundreds of different varieties, and many have gem uses. The variety
Agate is the best known. It is extremely abundant and creates unique
and stunning examples. Most Agate must
be trimmed and polished to bring out its beauty. Most specimens sold to
collectors have already been treated, in the form of tumbled stones or
polished slabs. Some Chalcedony is porous, and certain specimens can be
dyed. Agate specimens from Brazilian localities are dyed various
colors, and are sold without this fact being given over to the buyer.
Agate
Agate sometimes fills in a geode cavity, forming an "Agate
Geode", or an Agate Nodule. Most Agate on the market comes from these
nodules. Geodes form by expansion from an initial fluid-filled cavity,
such as the opening in a bivalve. The initial deposit, chalcedony,
forms from a silica gel that surrounds and isolates the salt solution.
If the water surrounding the forming geode becomes less saline, osmosis
begins to bring the salinity inside into equilibrium with that outside
(water seeps in, diluting the trapped solution), and the internal
pressure increases. The geode will expand in response to the pressure,
either at the expense of the surrounding limestone, which dissolves at
the limestone-silica interface, or, if the limestone has not hardened,
by pushing aside the lime mud. Expansion continues until the pressure
difference becomes negligible. If the initial cavity is inside a
fossil, the fossil is burst by the expanding geode. Ultimately,
dehydration and crystallization of the silica gel occur, followed by
shrinkage, cracking, and the entrance of water carrying dissolved
minerals, which are deposited on the chalcedony wall.
Chalcedony frequently forms pseudomorphs after other materials. Such an
example is petrified wood, or wood completely transformed to Chalcedony
(or Opal, in some cases). In the Petrified Forest National Monument in
Arizona, an entire forest was transformed into petrified wood. Remains
of this ancient forest can be seen in the huge silicafied logs that are
found in the area. Another well-known pseudomorph is Chalcedony after
coral. Underneath the Tampa Bay in Florida, much coral has been
replaced by Chalcedony, and its original form is preserved. Another
Chalcedony pseudomorph is the famous "Tigers Eye". This almost
legendary mineral has a most interesting and confusing appearance. It
is caused by a finely fibrous structure of Crocidolite that was once
present, but has been transformed into Chalcedony through
pseudomorphism. Impurities are frequently present in Chalcedony. They
may form a moss like growth in the mineral, forming what is known as
"Moss Agate". Another example is Dendritic Agate, which contains
manganese oxide impurities that form fabrications resembling trees. The
"trees" may be strikingly realistic.
Chalcedony is an important ornamental stone. The varieties Agate,
Chrysoprase, Carnelian, Sard, Tigers Eye, Bloodstone, Jasper, and Moss
Agate are all faceted into cabochons and beads, making fine gems. The
apple-green variety Chrysoprase is unique to its color and commends a
higher price than the other varieties. Agate is carved into cameos and
ornamental objects, and is sometimes sold as polished slabs. Different
varieties of Chalcedony are tumbled and polished, and sold to amateur
collectors by the tons.
Opal is a hydrous chalcedony. The 
water can be anywhere from 5% to 12% of the total mineral.
Colors range from white, yellow, orange, red, purple, blue, green, gray, brown, 
and black, and any specimens contain a rich play of colors (opalescence).
OPAL DISPLAYING IRIDESCENCE
There are different theories as to what 
causes the rich opalescence. It is now believed to be caused by small fissures in 
the structure that were filled with microscopic silica grains when the Opal 
formed. The rich play of colors gives Opal its splendor. 
Some Opal goes through a process known as 
crazing. This condition results from loss of water in its structure, and causes it to 
form internal cracks. In addition, the opalescence is reduced. This happens at 
random -- some specimens are susceptible while others are not. Leaving the Opal 
in distilled water can prevent crazing. (It is for this reason Opal specimens are 
sold in water.) Once taken out of the water, the Opal is at risk. If it is taken out of 
water and does not crack, one need not worry about further crazing. 


